dictyNews
Electronic Edition
Volume 31, number 15
November 14, 2008

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu
or by using the form at
http://dictybase.org/db/cgi-bin/dictyBase/abstract_submit.

Back issues of dictyNews, the Dicty Reference database and other
useful information is available at dictyBase - http://dictybase.org.

=========
Abstracts
=========



Differentiation inducing factor-1 (DIF-1) induces gene and protein expression 
of the Dictyostelium nuclear calmodulin-binding protein nucleomorphin

Danton H. O’Day1,2,4, Yekaterina Poloz2, Michael A. Myre3

1Department of Biology, University of Toronto at Mississauga, Mississauga, 
Ontario L5L 1C6, CANADA
2Department of Cell & Systems Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario M5S 3G5, CANADA
3Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, 185 Cambridge St. , Boston, MA 02114, USA 
4danton.oday@utoronto.ca


Cellular Signalling, accepted, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cellsig.2008.10.019

The nucleomorphin gene numA1 from Dictyostelium codes for a multi-domain, 
calmodulin binding protein that regulates nuclear number. To gain insight into 
the regulation of numA, we assessed the effects of the stalk cell differentiation
 inducing factor-1 (DIF-1), an extracellular signalling molecule, on the 
expression of numA1 RNA and protein. For comparison, the extracellular 
signalling molecules cAMP (mediates chemotaxis, prestalk and prespore 
differentiation) and ammonia (NH3/NH4+; antagonizes DIF) were also 
studied. Starvation, which is a signal for multicellular development, results 
in a greater than 80% decrease in numA1 mRNA expression within 4 hours. 
Treatment with ammonium chloride led to a greater than 90% inhibition of 
numA1 RNA expression within 2 hours. In contrast, the addition of DIF-1 
completely blocked the decrease in numA1 gene expression caused by 
starvation. Treatment of vegetative cells with cAMP led to decreases in 
numA1 RNA expression that were equivalent to those seen with starvation. 
Western blotting after various morphogen treatments showed that the 
maintenance of vegetative levels of numA1 RNA by DIF-1 in starved cells 
was reflected in significantly increased numA1 protein levels. Treatment 
with cAMP and/or ammonia led to decreased protein expression and each 
of these morphogens suppressed the stimulatory effects of DIF-1. Protein 
expression levels of CBP4a, a calcium-dependent binding partner of 
numA1, were regulated in the same manner as numA1 suggesting this 
potential co-regulation may be related to their functional relationship. 
NumA1 is the first calmodulin binding protein shown to be regulated by 
developmental morphogens in Dictyostelium being upregulated by 
DIF-1 and down-regulated by cAMP and ammonia.


Submitted by: Danton O'Day [danton.oday@utoronto.ca]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


An extrachromosomal, inducible expression system for 
Dictyostelium discoideum.

Douwe M. Veltman*, Ineke Keizer-Gunnink and Peter J.M. Van Haastert
* corresponding author


Plasmid, in press

Inducible expression systems are essential for the expression of toxic proteins 
and are very convenient for proteins that induce strong side effects such as 
retardation of growth or development. Currently available systems for use in 
Dictyostelium either do not have a very tight control over expression levels 
or use a combination of an integrating and an extrachromosomal vector. We 
designed a new vector in which all components of the available 2-plasmid 
tetracycline-inducible system were combined onto a single extrachromosomal 
vector. Two types of inducible plasmids are presented, in which transcription 
is induced by adding or removing doxycycline respectively. The location and 
orientation of the components was optimized in order to obtain a low 
background expression combined with high inducibility. The resulting vectors 
have a very low expression in the uninduced state (>1,000-fold lower 
expression compared to that resulting from the act15 promoter), show a 
10,000-fold induction of gene expression in a doxycycline 
concentration-dependent manner and are comparatively small (8.5 kb). 
With these new vectors, inducible gene expression is as easy as 
constitutive gene expression.


Submitted by: Douwe M. Veltman [d.veltman@beatson.gla.ac.uk]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Efficient cell lysis method for isolation of total RNA from slime mold Dictyostelium: 
Applicability in preparation of cDNA

Bhavesh Vats and Harish Padh

Department of Cell and Molecular Biology
B. V. Patel Pharmaceutical Education and Research Development (PERD) Centre, 
Thaltej- Gandhinagar Highway, Thaltej, Ahmedabad – 380054, INDIA.
Telephone Number: +91-79-27439375, Fax number: +91-79-27450449.
Email: perd@perdcentre.com


International Journal of Biotechnology and Biochemistry, in press

Dictyostelium is a model organism for understanding of many cellular processes, 
evolutionary studies, behavioral analysis, gene expression and now even drug 
metabolism. RNA analysis is vital to most studies at molecular level. Extracting 
RNA is no easy task due to the omnipresence of robust RNases. Attaining full 
length mRNAs is the chief task in isolation of pure RNA. Stable ribonucleases 
are the major obstacle in isolating RNA of any kind. Many methods and kits are 
available for different organisms with differing efficiency, utility and expense. 
For isolation of RNA from Dictyostelium, Blumberg and Lodish devised a simple, 
in-expensive yet effective method, though for identification of mRNA use of 
DNase and poly-dT columns were required. We modified the cell 
homogenization process and isolated total RNA with the method. The 
modification enables us to detect specific mRNA from the total RNA pool 
without purifying through poly-dT columns or processing for DNA removal. The 
integrity of RNA isolated by the modified method was similar to that of RNA 
extracted with Qiagen RNAasy Mini kit indicative of the quality of the total RNA
 extracted. With this modification, we have been able to identify three mRNA 
transcripts and specifically amplify the cDNA using sequence specific primers.


Submitted by: Harish Padh [hpadh@yahoo.com]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Multiple Mechanisms for Accumulation of Myosin II Filaments at the Equator 
During Cytokinesis

Shigehiko Yumura, Masahiro Ueda, Yasushi Sako, Toshiko  Kitanishi-Yumura, 
Toshio Yanagida


Traffic, in press

Total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy revealed how individual bipolar 
myosin II filaments accumulate at the equatorial region in dividing Dictyostelium 
cells. Direct observation of individual filaments in live cells provided us with 
much convincing information. Myosin II filaments accumulated at the equatorial 
region by at least two independent mechanisms: (i) cortical flow, which is driven 
by myosin II motor activities and (ii) de novo association to the equatorial cortex. 
These two mechanisms were mutually redundant. At the same time, myosin II 
filaments underwent rapid turnover, repeating their association and dissociation 
with the actin cortex. Examination of the lifetime of mutant myosin filaments in 
the cortex revealed that the turnover mainly depended on heavy chain 
phosphorylation and that myosin motor activity accelerated the turnover. Double 
mutant myosin II deficient in both motor and phosphorylation still accumulated 
at the equatorial region, although they displayed no cortical flow and 
considerably slow turnover. Under this condition, the filaments stayed for a 
significantly longer time at the equatorial region than at the polar regions, 
indicating that there are still other mechanisms for myosin II accumulation 
such as binding partners or stabilizing activity of filaments in the equatorial 
cortex. 


Submitted by: Shigehiko Yumura [yumura@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Identification of a target for CudA the transcription factor that directs formation 
of the Dictyostelium tip organiser

Hong Yu Wang and Jeffrey G. Williams 
University of Dundee
College of Life Sciences
University of Dundee 
Dow St.
Dundee DD1 5EH
U. K.


Int J Dev Biol, in press

The tip of the Dictyostelium slug functions much like an embryonic organiser; when 
grafted onto the flank of a recipient slug it recruits a mass of prespore cells and 
leads them away as part of a secondary slug. CudA is a nuclear protein that is 
expressed in prespore cells where it acts as a specific transcription factor. CudA 
is also expressed in an anteriorly located group of cells, the tip-organiser, that 
is believed to constitute the functional tip. We identify an expansin-like gene, 
expl7, that is expressed within the tip-organiser region and that is not expressed 
in a cudA null strain. The expl7promoter contains a region that binds to CudA in 
vitro and this region is necessary for expression in the tip-organiser. These 
results provide an end-point for a previously defined signal transduction pathway; 
wherein regionalised expression of the ACA adenylyl cyclase within the 
tip-organiser leads to localised cAMP-induced activation of STATa and consequent 
binding of STATa to the cudA promoter. STATa then induces expression of cudA and 
cudA directs the transcription of target genes such as expl7.


Submitted by: Jeff Williams [j.g.williams@dundee.ac.uk]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Dictyostelium Dock180-related RacGEFs Regulate the Actin Cytoskeleton 
during Cell Motility

Alessia Para*, Miriam Krischke*, Sylvain Merlot, Zhouxin Shen, Michael Oberholzer, 
Susan Lee, Steven Briggs, and Richard A. Firtel

* These two authors contributed equally to the work

Section of Cell and Developmental Biology
Division of Biological Sciences
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0380


Molecular Biology of the Cell, in press

Cell motility of amoeboid cells is mediated by localized F-actin polymerization 
that drives the extension of membrane protrusions to promote forward movements. 
We show that deletion of either of two members of the Dictyostelium Dock180 
family of RacGEFs, DockA and DockD, causes decreased speed of chemotaxing 
cells. The phenotype is enhanced in the double mutant and expression of DockA 
or DockD complements the reduced speed of randomly moving DockD null cells’ 
phenotype, suggesting that DockA and DockD are likely to act redundantly and 
to have similar functions in regulating cell movement. In this regard, we find that 
overexpressing DockD causes increased cell speed by enhancing F-actin 
polymerization at the sites of pseudopod extension. DockD localizes to the cell
 cortex upon chemoattractant stimulation and at the leading edge of migrating 
cells and that this localization is dependent on PI3K activity, suggesting that 
DockD might be part of the pathway that links PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 production to 
F-actin polymerization. Using a proteomic approach, we found that DdELMO1 
is associated with DockD and that Rac1A and RacC are possible in vivo DockD 
substrates. In conclusion, our work provides a further understanding of how 
cell motility is controlled and provides evidence that the molecular mechanism 
underlying Dock180-related protein function is evolutionarily conserved.


Submitted by: Rick Firtel [rafirtel@ucsd.edu]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Autophagy contributes to degradation of Hirano bodies

Kim, D. H., Davis R. C., Furukawa R. , Fechheimer M.

Department of Cellular Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, 
USA


Autophagy, in press.

Hirano bodies are actin-rich inclusions reported most frequently in the
 hippocampus in association with a variety of conditions including 
neurodegenerative diseases and aging. We have developed a model 
system for formation of Hirano bodies in Dictyostelium and cultured 
mammalian cells to permit detailed studies of the dynamics of these 
structures in living cells. Model Hirano bodies are frequently observed 
in membrane-enclosed vesicles in mammalian cells consistent with a 
role of autophagy in the degradation of these structures. Clearance of 
Hirano bodies by an exocytotic process is supported by images from 
electron microscopy showing extracellular release of Hirano bodies, 
and observation of Hirano bodies in the culture medium of Dictyostelium 
and mammalian cells. An autophagosome marker protein Atg8-GFP was
 colocalized with model Hirano bodies in wild-type Dictyostelium cells, but 
not in atg5(-) or atg1-1 autophagy mutant strains. Induction of model Hirano 
bodies in Dictyostelium with a high-level expression of 34 kDa DeltaEF1
 from the inducible discoidin promoter resulted in larger Hirano bodies 
and a cessation of cell doubling. The degradation of model Hirano bodies 
still occurred rapidly in autophagy mutant (atg5(-)) Dictyostelium, 
suggesting that other mechanisms such as the ubiquitin-mediated 
proteasome pathway could contribute to the degradation of Hirano bodies. 
Chemical inhibition of the proteasome pathway with lactacystin significantly 
decreased the turnover of Hirano bodies in Dictyostelium, providing direct 
evidence that autophagy and the proteasome can both contribute to 
degradation of Hirano bodies. Short-term treatment of mammalian cells 
with either lactacystin or 3-methyl adenine results in higher levels of 
Hirano bodies and a lower level of viable cells in the cultures, supporting 
the conclusion that both autophagy and the proteasome contribute to 
degradation of Hirano bodies.


Submitted by: Chandra Jack [chanj@rice.edu]
==============================================================
[End dictyNews, volume 31, number 15]
