dictyNews
Electronic Edition
Volume 31, number 2
July 11, 2008

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu
or by using the form at
http://dictybase.org/db/cgi-bin/dictyBase/abstract_submit.

Back issues of dictyNews, the Dicty Reference database and other
useful information is available at dictyBase - http://dictybase.org.


=========
Abstracts
=========



The GPI-anchored Superoxide Dismutase, SodC, is essential for regulating 
basal Ras activity and chemotaxis of Dictyostelium discoideum

Sudhakar Veeranki, Bohye Kim, and Leung Kim* 
 
Dept of Biological Sciences, Florida International University,
Miami, Fl 33199 USA


Journal of Cell Sciences, in press

A genetic screen for Dictyostelium mutant displaying high level of constitutive 
Phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-triphosphate (PIP3) led to the finding that the  
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchored superoxide dismutase, SodC, 
regulates small GTPase Ras. Cells lacking SodC exhibited constitutively high 
levels of active Ras, more membrane localization of GFP-PHcrac, and defects in 
chemoattractant sensing, cell polarization, and motility. These defects of sodC- 
cells were partially restored by expression of wild type SodC but not with the 
catalytically inactive mutant SodC (H245R, H247Q). Furthermore, an inhibition of 
PI3K activity in sodC- cells by LY294002 only partially restored chemoattractant 
sensing and cell polarization, consistent with the fact that sodC- cells have 
aberrantly high level of active Ras, which functions upstream of PI3K. Higher 
level of active GFP-RasG was observed in sodC- cells, which significantly 
decreased upon incubation of sodC- cells with the superoxide scavenger XTT. 
Having constitutively high levels of active Ras proteins and more membrane 
localization of GFP-PHcrac, sodC- cells exhibited severe defects in 
chemoattractant sensing, cell polarization, and motility.  


Submitted by: Kim Leung [kiml@fiu.edu]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Dictyostelium kinase DPYK3 negatively regulates STATc signaling in cell fate 
decision.

Nam-Sihk Lee, Marbelys Rodriguez, Bohye Kim, and Leung Kim* 

Department of Biological Sciences
Florida International University
Miami, FL 33199 USA


Development, Growth and Differentiation, in press

DPYK3, a member of the Dictyostelium TKL (Tyrosine Kinase Like) kinase family, 
was ablated by homologous recombination. dpyk3- cells displayed aberrant 
pattern formation during development. The prestalk O zone was not properly 
formed and, instead, the prespore zone was expanded in dpyk3- slugs. During 
development, the transcription factor STATc was persistently phosphorylated 
and ecmAO expression level was kept low in dpyk3- cells. Furthermore, in 
response to DIF-1 in suspension culture, dypk3- cells displayed persistent 
STATc phosphorylation and re-introduction of DPYK3 in dypk3- cells restored 
transient STATc phosphorylation similarly to wild type cells. In contrast to the 
positive STAT regulation by Janus Kinase in metazoans, Dictyostelium DPYK3 
negatively regulates STATc during development in response to DIF-1 signaling. 


Submitted by: Kim Leung [kiml@fiu.edu]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Modulation of actin structure and function by phosphorylation of Tyr-53 
and profilin binding

Kyuwon Baek*†, Xiong Liu*‡, François Ferron†, Shi Shu‡, Edward D. Korn‡§, 
Roberto Dominguez†§

†University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Department of Physiology, 
3700 Hamilton Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6085, USA.
‡Laboratory of Cell Biology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
*These authors contributed equally to this work


Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, in press

On starvation, Dictyostelium cells aggregate to form multicellular fruiting 
bodies containing spores that germinate when transferred to nutrient-rich 
medium. This developmental cycle correlates with the extent of actin 
phosphorylation at Tyr-53 (pY53-actin), which is low in vegetative cells 
but high in viable mature spores. Here we describe high-resolution crystal 
structures of pY53-actin and unphosphorylated actin in complexes with 
gelsolin segment 1 and profilin. In the structure of pY53-actin, the phosphate 
group on Tyr-53 makes hydrogen-bonding interactions with residues 
of the DNase I-binding loop (D-loop) of actin, resulting in a more stable 
conformation of the D-loop than in the unphosphorylated structures. A more 
rigidly folded D-loop may explain some of the previously described 
properties of pY53-actin, including its increased critical concentration for 
polymerization, reduced rates of nucleation and pointed end elongation, and 
weak affinity for DNase I. We show here that phosphorylation of Tyr-53 
inhibits subtilisin cleavage of the D-loop and reduces the rate of nucleotide 
exchange on actin. The structure of profilin-Dictyostelium-actin is strikingly 
similar to previously determined structures of profilin-beta-actin and 
profilin-alpha-actin. By comparing this representative set of profilin-actin 
structures with other structures of actin we highlight the effects of profilin 
on the actin conformation. In the profilin-actin complexes, subdomains 
1 and 3 of actin close around profilin, producing a 4.7º rotation of the two 
major domains of actin relative to each other. As a result, the nucleotide cleft 
becomes moderately more open in the profilin-actin complex, probably 
explaining the stimulation of nucleotide exchange on actin by profilin.


Submitted by: Edward Korn [edk@nih.gov]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Actin-Cytoskeleton Dynamics in Non-monotonic Cell Spreading

Doris Heinrich1, Simon Youssef1, Britta Schroth-Diez2, Ulrike Engel3, 
Daniel Aydin4, Jacques Bluemmel4, Joachim Spatz4, and Guenther Gerisch5*

1 Department fuer Physik, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, 
Geschwister-Scholl-Platz 1, D-80539 Muenchen, Germany.
2 Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, 
Pfotenhauerstr. 108, D-01307 Dresden, Germany.
3 Nikon Imaging Center at the University of Heidelberg, Bioquant BQ 0004, 
Im Neuenheimer Feld 267, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
4 Max Planck Institute for Metals Research, Dept. of New Materials and 
Biosystems, Heisenbergstr. 3, D-70569 Stuttgart, Germany, and 
University of Heidelberg, Dept. of Biophysical Chemistry.
5  Max-Planck-Institut fuer Biochemie, Am Klopferspitz 18, D-82152 
Martinsried, Germany.
 

Cell Adhesion & Migration, in press

The spreading of motile cells on a substrate surface is accompanied by 
reorganization of their actin network. We show that spreading in the highly 
motile cells of Dictyostelium is non-monotonic, and thus differs from the 
passage of spreading cells through a regular series of stages. Quantification 
of the gain and loss of contact area revealed fluctuating forces of protrusion 
and retraction that dominate the interaction of Dictyostelium cells with a 
substrate. The molecular basis of these fluctuations is elucidated by 
dual-fluorescence labeling of filamentous actin together with proteins that 
highlight specific activities in the actin system. Front-to-tail polarity is 
established by the sorting out of myosin-II from regions where dense actin 
assemblies are accumulating. Myosin-IB identifies protruding front regions, 
and the Arp2/3 complex localizes to lamellipodia protruded from these regions. 
Coronin is used as a sensitive indicator of actin disassembly to visualize 
the delicate balance of polymerization and depolymerization in spreading 
cells. Short-lived actin patches that co-localize with clathrin suggest that 
membrane internalization occurs even when the substrate-attached cell 
surface expands. We conclude that non-monotonic cell spreading is 
characterized by spatiotemporal patterns formed by motor proteins together 
with regulatory proteins that either promote or terminate actin polymerization 
on the scale of seconds.



Submitted by: Guenther Gerisch [gerisch@biochem.mpg.de]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Regulation of Contractile Vacuole Formation and Activity in Dictyostelium

Fei Du, Kimberly Edwards, Zhouxin Shen, Binggang Sun, Arturo De Lozanne, 
Steven Briggs, and Richard A. Firtel


Section of Cell and Developmental Biology, Division of Biological Sciences, 
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0380, USA
and Section of Molecular Cell & Developmental Biology and Institute for 
Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Texas at Austin, 
Austin, TX 78712, USA


EMBO J., in press

The contractile vacuole (CV) system is the osmoregulatory organelle required 
for survival for many free-living cells under hypotonic conditions. We 
identified a new CV regulator, Disgorgin, a TBC domain-containing protein, 
which translocates to the CV membrane at the late stage of CV charging and 
regulates CV/plasma membrane fusion and discharging. disgorgin- cells produce 
large CVs due to impaired CV/plasma membrane fusion. Disgorgin is a specific 
GAP for Rab8A-GTP, which also localizes to the CV and whose hydrolysis is 
required for discharging. We demonstrate that Drainin, a previously identified 
TBC-domain-containing protein, lies upstream from Disgorgin in this pathway. 
Unlike Disgorgin, Drainin lacks GAP activity but functions as a Rab11A 
effector. The BEACH family proteins LvsA and LvsD were identified in a 
suppressor/enhancer screen of the disgorgin- large CV phenotype and 
demonstrated to have distinct functions in regulating CV formation. Our 
studies help define the pathways controlling CV function.


Submitted by: Rick Firtel [rafirtel@ucsd.edu]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Article Addendum
Vacuole membrane protein 1, autophagy and much more

Javier Calvo-Garrido, Sergio Carilla-Latorre and Ricardo Escalante

Instituto de Investigaciones Biomedicas Alberto Sols, Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad Autonoma de Madrid,
Calle Arturo Duperier 4, 28029 Madrid, Spain


Autophagy, In press


Vacuole membrane protein 1 (Vmp1) is a putative transmembrane protein that 
has been associated with different functions including autophagy, cell 
adhesion and membrane traffic. Highly similar proteins are present in lower 
eukaryotes and plants although a homologue is absent in the fungi lineage. 
We have recently described the first loss-of-function mutation for a Vmp1 
homologue in a model system, Dictyostelium discoideum. Our results give a 
more comprehensive view of the intricate roles played by this new gene. 
Dictyostelium Vmp1 is an endoplasmic reticulum-resident protein. Cells 
deficient in Vmp1 display pleiotropic defects in the context of the 
secretory pathway such as organelle biogenesis, the endocytic pathway and 
protein secretion.  The biogenesis of the contractile vacuole, an organelle 
necessary to survive under hypoosmotic conditions, is compromised as well 
as the structure of the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi apparatus. 
Transmission electron microscopy also shows abnormal accumulation of 
aberrant double-membrane vesicles, suggesting a defect in autophagosome 
biogenesis or maturation. The expression of a mammalian Vmp1 in the 
Dictyostelium mutant complements the phenotype suggesting a functional 
conservation during evolution. We are taking the first steps in 
understanding the function of this fascinating protein and recent studies 
have brought us more questions than answers about its basic function and 
its role in human pathology.


Submitted by: Ricardo Escalante [rescalante@iib.uam.es]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Kinesin-5 is Not Essential for Mitotic Spindle Elongation in Dictyostelium

Irina Tikhonenko, Dilip K. Nag, Nora Martin, and Michael P. Koonce

Wadsworth Center, Albany, NY


Cell Motil. Cytoskel, in press

The proper assembly and operation of the mitotic spindle is essential to 
ensure the accurate segregation of chromosomes and to position the cytokinetic 
furrow during cell division in eukaryotes. Not only are dynamic microtubules 
required, but also the concerted actions of multiple motor proteins are 
necessary to effect spindle pole separation, chromosome alignment, chromatid 
segregation, and spindle elongation. Although a number of motor proteins are 
known to play a role in mitosis, there remains a limited understanding of 
their full range of functions and the details by which they interact with 
other spindle components. The kinesin-5 (BimC/Eg5) family of motors is 
largely considered essential to drive spindle pole separation during the 
initial and latter stages of mitosis. We have deleted the gene encoding the 
kinesin-5 member in Dictyostelium, (kif13), and find that, in sharp contrast 
with results found in vertebrate, fly, and yeast organisms, kif13- cells 
continue to grow at rates indistinguishable from wild type. Phenotype analysis 
reveals a slight increase in spindle elongation rates in the absence of Kif13. 
More importantly, there is a dramatic, premature separation of spindle halves i
n kif13- cells, suggesting a novel role of this motor in maintaining spindle 
integrity at the terminal stages of division.

Submitted by: Michael Koonce [koonce@wadsworth.org]
==============================================================
[End dictyNews, volume 31, number 2]
