Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 13, number 1
July 3, 1999

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"


=============
  Abstracts
=============

Cortexillin I is required for development in Polysphondylium

Petra Fey and Edward C. Cox

333 Moffett Laboratories, Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton 
University, Princeton NJ 08544

Developmental Biology, in press

Abstract

The actin binding proteins cortexillin I and II play a major role in 
Dictyostelium cytokinesis where they are found localized to the membranes 
of the cleavage furrow. Here we report on cortexillin I mutants isolated 
by gene trapping in Polysphondylium . The original mutation and 
reconstructed versions of the original, as well as cortexillin I 
deletions, are unable to form aggregation streams under starvation 
conditions. The fruiting bodies that do form when cells are grown on 
bacterial lawns lack the one and two-dimensional symmetries so apparent 
in wild-type. These two phenotypes and the proposed structural basis for 
them suggest that cortexillin I functions in chemotaxis and morphogenesis 
in addition to its role in cytokinesis.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A cell-counting factor regulating structure size in Dictyostelium

Debra A. Brock and Richard H. Gomer

Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology MS-140, Rice University, 6100 S. Main Street, Houston, TX 77005-1892

Genes&Development, in press

Abstract

	Developing Dictyostelium cells form large aggregation streams which
break up into groups of 0.2 - 1 x 10exp5 cells.  Each group then becomes a
fruiting body.  smlA cells oversecrete an unknown factor which causes
aggregation streams to break up into groups of ~5 x 10exp3 cells and thus
form very small fruiting bodies.  We have purified the counting factor and
find that it behaves as a complex of polypeptides with an effective
molecular weight of 450 kD.  One of the polypeptides is a 40 kD hydrophilic
protein we have named countin.  Immunofluorescence shows that countin is
present in all cells and Western blots indicate that countin is secreted.
In transformants with a disrupted countin gene, there is no detectable
secretion of counting factor, and the aggregation streams do not break up,
resulting in huge (up to 2 x 10exp5 cell) fruiting bodies.  Addition  of
crude countin factor causes the countin cells to form normal size
aggregates.  Using diffusion calculations, we find that as a general
principle such a factor can be used to sense the number of cells in a group.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Rearrangement of cortex proteins constitutes an osmoprotective mechanism 
in Dictyostelium

Hans Zischka, Felix Oehme, Tanja Pintsch, Alexander Ott, Heike Keller, 
Joseph Kellermann and Stephan C. Schuster

Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie, 82152 Martinsried, Germany

EMBO Journal, in Press

Abstract 

Dictyostelium responds to hyperosmotic stress of 400 mOsm by a rapid 
reduction of its cell volume to 50 %. The reduced cell volume is maintained 
as long as these osmotic conditions prevail. Dictyostelium does not accumulate 
compatible osmolytes to counteract the osmotic pressure applied. By two 
dimensional gel electrophoresis we demonstrate that during the osmotic shock 
the protein pattern remains unaltered in whole cell extracts. However, when 
cells were fractionated into membrane and cytoskeleton fractions, alterations 
of specific proteins could be demonstrated. In the crude membrane fraction a 
3-fold increase in protein amount was measured upon hyperosmotic stress. In 
the cytoskeletal fraction the proteins DdLIM and the regulatory myosin light 
chain (RMLC) were shown to be regulated in the osmotic stress response. The 
elongation factors eEF1a (ABP50) and eEF1b were found to increase in the 
cytoskeletal fraction, suggesting a translational arrest upon hyperosmotic 
stress. Furthermore, the two main components of the cytoskeleton, actin and 
myosin II, are phosphorylated as a consequence of the osmotic shock with a 
tyrosine residue as phosphorylation site on actin and specific threonines 
in the case of the myosin II heavy chain.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

DAip1, a Dictyostelium Homologue of the Yeast Actin-Interacting Protein 1,
Is Involved in Endocytosis, Cytokinesis and Motility

Angelika Konzok, Igor Weber, Evelyn Simmeth, Ulrike Hacker, Markus Maniak*,
and Annette Müller-Taubenberger

Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany, and *MRC
Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College London WC1E 6BT, UK

J. Cell Biol., in press

Abstract

The 64-kDa protein DAip1 from Dictyostelium contains nine WD40-repeats and
is homologous to the actin-interacting protein 1, Aip1p, from Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, and to related proteins from Caenorhabditis, Physarum and
higher eukaryotes.
We show that DAip1 is localized to dynamic regions of the cell cortex that
are enriched in filamentous actin: phagocytic cups, macropinosomes,
lamellipodia and pseudopodia. In cells expressing GFP-tagged DAip1, the
protein rapidly redistributes into newly formed cortical protrusions.
Functions of DAip1 in vivo were assessed using null mutants generated by
gene replacement, and by overexpressing DAip1. DAip1-null cells are
impaired in growth and their rates of fluid phase uptake, phagocytosis and
movement are reduced in comparison to wild-type rates. Cytokinesis is
prolonged in DAip1-null cells and they tend to become multinucleate. On the
basis of similar results of DAip1 overexpression and effects of latrunculin
A, we propose a function for DAip1 in the control of actin depolymerization
in vivo, probably through interaction with cofilin. Our data suggest that
DAip1 plays an important regulatory role in the rapid remodeling of the
cortical actin meshwork.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A novel Ras interacting protein required for chemotaxis and cAMP signal 
relay in Dictyostelium. 

Lee, S., C.A. Parent, R. Insall and R.A. Firtel

Mol. Biol. Cell, in press.

ABSTRACT

We have identified a novel Ras interacting protein from Dictyostelium, 
RIP3, whose function is required for both chemotaxis and the synthesis 
and relay of the cAMP chemoattractant signal. rip3 null cells are unable 
to aggregate and lack receptor activation of adenylyl cyclase but are 
able, in response to cAMP, to induce aggregation-stage, postaggregative, 
and cell-type-specific gene expression in suspension culture. In addition, 
rip3 null cells are unable to properly polarize in a cAMP gradient and 
chemotaxis is highly impaired. We demonstrate that cAMP stimulation of 
guanylyl cyclase, which is required for chemotaxis, is reduced ~60% in 
rip3 null cells. This reduced activation of guanylyl cyclase may account, 
in part, for the defect in chemotaxis. When cells are pulsed with cAMP 
for 5 h to mimic the endogenous cAMP oscillations that occur in wild-type 
strains, the cells will form aggregates, most of which, however, arrest 
at the mound stage. Unlike the response seen in wild-type strains, the 
rip3 null cell aggregates that form under these experimental conditions 
are very small, which is probably due to the rip3 null cell chemotaxis 
defect. Many of the phenotypes of rip3 null cell, including the inability 
to activate adenylyl cyclase in response to cAMP and defects in chemotaxis, 
are very similar to those of strains carrying a disruption of the gene 
encoding the putative Ras exchange factor AleA. We demonstrate that aleA 
null cells also exhibit a defect in cAMP-mediated activation of guanylyl 
cyclase similar to that of rip3 null cells. A double knockout mutant 
(rip3/aleA null cells) exhibits a further reduction in receptor activation 
of guanylyl cyclase and these cells display almost no cell polarization 
or movement in cAMP gradients. As RIP3 preferentially interacts with an 
activated form of the Dictyostelium Ras protein RasG, which itself is 
important for cell movement, we propose that RIP3 and AleA are components 
of a Ras-regulated pathway involved in integrating chemotaxis and signal 
relay pathways that are essential for aggregation. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Biochemical Characterization of a Dictyostelium Myosin II Heavy Chain 
Phosphatase that Promotes Filament Assembly

M.B. Murphy, T.T. Egelhoff

Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4970.

Eur. J. Biochem. in press

In Dictyostelium cells, myosin II is found as cytosolic non-assembled 
monomers and as cytoskeletal bipolar filaments.  It is thought that the 
phosphorylation state of three threonine residues in the tail of myosin II 
heavy chain regulates the molecular motor's assembly state and localization. 
 Phosphorylation of the myosin heavy chain at threonine residues 1823, 1833, 
2029 is responsible for maintaining myosin in the non-assembled state, and 
subsequent dephosphorylation of these residues is a prerequisite for 
assembly into the cytoskeleton.  We report here the characterization of 
myosin heavy chain phosphatase activities in Dictyostelium utilizing myosin 
II phosphorylated by Myosin Heavy Chain Kinase A as a substrate.  One of the 
myosin heavy chain phosphatase activities was identified as protein 
phosphatase 2A and the purified holoenzyme was composed of a 37 kDa 
catalytic subunit, a 65 kDa A-subunit, and a 55 kDa B-subunit.  The PP2A 
holoenzyme displays two orders of magnitude more activity towards myosin 
phosphorylated on the heavy chains than it does towards myosin 
phosphorylated on the regulatory light chains, consistent with a role in the 
control of filament assembly.  The purified myosin heavy chain phosphatase 
activity promotes bipolar filament assembly in vitro via dephosphorylation 
of the myosin heavy chain.  This system should provide a valuable model for 
studying the regulation and localization of PP2A in the context of 
cytoskeletal reorganization.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Molecular Characterization and Immunolocalization of Dictyostelium 
discoideum Protein Phosphatase 2A

M.B. Murphy, S.K. Levi, T.T. Egelhoff
 
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Case Western Reserve University 
Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4970

FEBS Letters, in press

Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) was previously purified from Dictyostelium and 
biochemically characterized.  The purified PP2A holoenzyme was composed of a 
37 kDa catalytic "C-subunit", a 65 kDa "A-subunit", and a 55 kDa "B 
subunit".  We report here the characterization of the genes encoding the 
Dictyostelium PP2A subunits as well as the immunolocalization of the PP2A 
subunits in Dictyostelium.  The cDNAs encoding the B- and C-subunits were 
isolated from a Dictyostelium library and the deduced amino-acid sequences 
reveal strong conservation with the mammalian PP2A homologues.  Southern 
blot analysis suggests that each of the PP2A subunit genes are present in a 
single copy.  The PP2A subunits were localized mainly to the cytosol in 
Dictyostelium cells.  However, immunofluorescence confocal microscopy 
demonstrates that the B-subunit of PP2A is highly enriched in centrosomes, 
suggesting a potential role for this PP2A regulatory subunit in centrosomal 
function.



----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 13, number 1]

  