Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 13, number 8
25 September, 1999

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

=============
  Abstracts
=============

[Editors note:  The following abstract appeared in the last issue.  Due to
problems with translation of embedded symbols, the units associated with the
forces appeared incorrectly.  A corrected version of the abstract is 
reprinted in its entirety below.]

Migration Forces in Dictyostelium Measured by Centrifuge DIC Microscopy

Yoshio Fukui 1, Taro Q. P. Uyeda2, Chikako Kitayama 2, and Shinya Inoué3 

1 Cell and Molecular Biology, Northwestern University Medical School, 
Chicago, IL 60611-3008.
2 Biomolecular Research Group, National Institute for Advanced 
Interdisciplinary Research, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8562, Japan. 
3 Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA 02543-1015.

Biological Bulletin, in press

Abstract

   Amoeboid locomotion represents an important biological activity 
involved in cell growth and development .  Forces that underlie movement 
of the giant amoeba, Chaos chaos, have been estimated to be 1.5 x 10e2 
pN/micrometer2 as measured by Kamiya’s double chamber method.  For a slime 
mold, Dictyostelium discoideum, the forces of cell locomotion have been 
unknown, but the cortex resists poking with a microneedle (cortical tension) 
at 4.1 x 10e3 pN/micrometer2 (Pasternak et al., 1989) .  By micropipette 
aspiration, the cortical tension of D. discoideum has been measured as 1.55 
x 10e3 pN/micrometer2 (Gerald et al., 1998).  In the present study, we have 
determined the migration stalling forces of D. discoideum by using a 
Centrifuge Polarizing Microscope (CPM) equipped with DIC optics (Goda et 
al., 1998).  The results demonstrated that individual wild type (NC4) 
amoebae can crawl centripetally on a glass surface in resistance to 
gravitational forces larger than 11,465 x g.  NC4 amoebae can also 
undergo normal cytokinesis at forces of at least 8,376 x g.

(Addendum)

Our results also showed that the gravitational forces equivalent to the 
migration stall forces for NC4, AX3, HS1 (mhcA-: Ruppel et al., 1994), 
and A5 (myoA-/myoB-/mhcA-: Kitayama et al., 1998) are, respectively,  
>2.77 x 10e3 pN, 1.08 x 10e3 pN, 0.28 x 10e3 pN, and 0.30 x 103 pN.

A preprint will become available at http://pubweb.acns.nwu.edu/
~yoshifk/fukui.html.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Molecular mechanisms of membrane trafficking. What do we learn from 
Dictyostelium discoideum ?

Eva M. Neuhaus and Thierry Soldati#

Department of Molecular Cell Research, Max-Planck-Institute for Medical
Research, Jahnstrasse 29, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany

Protist, in press

Summary

   Thanks to increasing interest, understanding of the molecular mechanisms
underlying intracellular membrane transport is truly emerging. Even more
rapid advance is expected since the recognition that efforts to unravel both
membrane traffic and cytoskeleton need to be concerted. The two main
membrane traffic pathways are the biosynthetic/secretory route, where
transport occurs from the ER via the Golgi apparatus to the plasma membrane
and the endocytic route involving the flow from the plasma membrane to the
degradative compartment. These two pathways intersect at many compartments,
both comprise multiple transport steps and both involve efficient sorting of
membrane and soluble proteins. Here, we review recent studies on the
dissection of endocytic trafficking in Dictyostelium discoideum and
integrate the information in the light of knowledge acquired from other
systems.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

PAKa, a Putative PAK Family Member, is Required for Cytokinesis and 
the Regulation of the Cytoskeleton in Dictyostelium Cells during 
Chemotaxis

Chang Y. Chung and Richard A. Firtel

Department of Biology
Center for Molecular Genetics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0634

J. of Cell Biology, in press.

Abstract

We have identified a Dictyostelium gene encoding a serine/threonine 
kinase, PAKa, a putative member of the Ste20/PAK family of 
p21-activated kinases, with a kinase domain and a long N-terminal 
regulatory domain containing an acidic segment, a polyproline domain, 
and a CRIB domain.  PAKa co-localizes with myosin II to the cleavage 
furrow of dividing cells and the posterior of polarized, chemotaxing 
cells via its N-terminal domain.  paka null cells are defective in 
completing cytokinesis in suspension.  PAKa is also required for 
maintaining the direction of cell movement, suppressing lateral 
pseudopod extension, and proper retraction of the posterior of 
chemotaxing cells.  paka null cells are defective in myosin II 
assembly, as the myosin II cap in the posterior of chemotaxing cells 
and myosin II assembly into cytoskleton upon cAMP stimulation are 
absent in these cells, while constitutively active PAKa leads to an 
upregulation of myosin II assembly.  PAKa kinase activity against 
histone 2B is transiently stimulated and PAKa incorporates into the 
cytoskeleton with kinetics similar to those of myosin II assembly in 
response to chemoattractant signaling.  However, PAKa does not 
phosphorylate myosin II.  We suggest that PAKa is a major regulator 
of myosin II assembly, but does so by negatively regulating myosin II 
heavy chain kinase.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Promoter analysis of the membrane protein gp64 gene of the cellular 
slime mold Polysphondylium pallidum

Naohisa Takaoka 1, Masashi Fukuzawa 2, Tamao Saito 1, Takehisa 
Sakaitani 1 and Hiroshi Ochiai 1

1 Division of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Hokkaido 
University, Sapporo, 060-0810 Japan, 
2 Wellcome Trust Building, Department of Anatomy and Physiology, University 
of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee, DD1 4HN, UK

Biochem. Biophys. Acta, in press

Abstract

   We cloned a genomic fragment of the membrane protein gp64 gene of 
the cellular slime mold Polysphondylium pallidum by inverse PCR.  Primer 
extension analysis identified a major transcription start site 65 bp 
upstream of the translation start codon.  The promoter region of the gp64 
gene contains sequences homologous to a TATA box at position - 47 to - 37 
and to an initiator (Inr, PyPyCAPyPyPyPy) at position - 3 to + 5 from the 
transcription start site.  Successively truncated segments of the promoter 
were tested for their ability to drive expression of the ß-galactosidase 
reporter gene in transformed cells; also was the difference of the activity 
between the growth conditions compared.  The results indicated that there 
are two positive vegetative regulatory elements extending between -187 and 
-62 bp from the transcription start site of the gp64 promoter; also their 
activity was two to three times higher in the cells grown with bacteria 
in shaken suspension than in the cells grown in an axenic medium. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Identification of ?5-fatty acid desaturase from the cellular slime mold 
Dictyostelium discoideum 

Tamao SAITO and Hiroshi OCHIAI 

Division of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Hokkaido 
University, Sapporo, 060-0810 Japan 

Eur. J. Biochem. in press 

Abstract

   cDNA fragments putatively encoding amino acid sequences characteristic 
of the fatty acid desaturase were obtained using expressed sequence tag (EST) 
information of the Dictyostelium cDNA project.   Using this sequence, we 
have determined the cDNA sequence and genomic sequence of a desaturase.  The 
cloned cDNA is 1489 nucleotides long and the deduced amino acid sequence 
comprised 464 amino acid residues containing an N-terminal cytochrome b5 
domain.   The whole sequence was 38.6% identical to the first found 
?5-desaturase of Mortierella alpina.  We have confirmed its function as 
?5-desaturase by over expression mutation in D. discoideum and also the 
gain of function mutation in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.  Analysis of 
the lipids from transformed D. discoideum and yeast demonstrated the 
accumulation of ?5-desaturated products.   This is the first report about 
the fatty acid desaturase in the cellular slime molds. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A putative receptor mediating cell-density sensing in Dictyostelium

William J. Deery and Richard H. Gomer

Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, MS-140, Rice University, 6100 S. Main Street   Houston, TX
77005-1892

J. Biol. Chem., in press

Abstract

   When Dictyostelium cells starve, they begin secreting a
glycoprotein called conditioned medium factor (CMF).  When there is a high
density of starved cells, as indicated by a high concentration of CMF, the
cells begin expressing some genes and aggregate using pulses of cAMP as a
chemoatractant.  CMF regulates gene expression via a G protein-independent
pathway, while CMF regulates cAMP signal transduction via a G
protein-dependent pathway.  To elucidate receptors mediating cell density
sensing, we used CMF-sepharose to isolate membrane proteins that bind CMF.
We identified a 50 kD protein, CMFR1, that is sensitive to trypsin
treatment of whole cells.  We obtained partial amino acid sequence of CMFR1
and isolated the cDNA encoding it.  The derived amino acid sequence has no
significant similarity to known proteins, and has two or three predicted
transmembrane domains.  Expression of CMFR1 in insect cells caused an
increase in CMF binding.  Repression of CMFR1 in Dictyostelium by gene
disruption resulted in a ~50% decrease of the CMF binding, and a loss of
CMF-induced G protein-independent gene expression.  The G protein dependent
CMF signal transduction pathways appear to be functional in cmfr1 cells,
suggesting that cells sense the density-sensing factor CMF using two or
more different receptors.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 13, number 8]

  