Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 13, number 3
July 31, 1999

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

=============
  Abstracts
=============

DICTYOSTELIUM AS MODEL SYSTEM FOR STUDIES OF THE ACTIN CYTOSKELETON BY
MOLECULAR GENETICS

Ludwig Eichinger, Soo Sim Lee, and Michael Schleicher

Adolf-Butenandt-Institut/Zellbiologie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität,
Schillerstr. 42, 80336 München, Germany

Microscopy Research and Technique, in press

Abstract

The actin cytoskeleton is an essential structure for most movements at the
cellular and intracellular level. Whereas a muscle cell requires for
contraction a rather static organisation of cytoskeletal proteins, cell
motility of amoeboid cells relies on a tremendously dynamic turnover of
filamentous networks in a matter of seconds and at distinct regions inside
the cell. The best model system for studying cell motility is Dictyostelium
discoideum. The cells live as single amoebae but can also start a
developmental program that leads to multicellular stages and
differentiation into simple types of tissues. Thus cell motility can be
studied on single cells and on cells in a tissue-like aggregate. The
ability to combine protein purification and biochemistry with fairly easy
molecular genetics is a unique feature for investigation of the
cytoskeleton and cell motility. The actin cytoskeleton in Dictyostelium
harbours essentially all classes of actin-binding proteins that have been
found throughout eukaryotes. By conventional mutagenesis, gene disruption,
antisense approaches, or gene replacements many genes that code for
cytoskeletal proteins have been disrupted, and altered phenotypes in
transformants that lacked one or more of those cytoskeletal proteins
allowed solid conclusions about their in vivo function. In addition,
tagging the proteins or selected domains with green fluorescent protein
allows the monitoring of protein redistribution during cell movement. Gene
tagging by restriction enzyme mediated integration of vectors and the
ongoing international genome and cDNA sequencing projects offer the chance
to understand the dynamics of the cytoskeleton by identification and
functional characterisation of all proteins involved.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------


Molecular architecture of the rod domain of the Dictyostelium 
gelation factor (ABP120)

Paola Fucini (1), Bernd Koeppel (1), Michael Schleicher (2), Ariel Lustig
(3), Tad A. Holak (1), Rolf Mueller (5), Murray Stewart (4) and Angelika A.
Noegel (5)

(1) Max-Planck-Institut f. Biochemie, Martinsried, FRG,(2) Institut f.
Zellbiologie, Muenchen, FRG, (3) Biozentrum, Basel, Switzerland, (4) MRC
Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, England, (5) Institut f.
Biochemie I, Koeln, FRG

accepted: J. Mol. Biol.

The Dictyostelium discoideum gelation factor is a two-chain
actin-crosslinking protein that, in addition to an N-terminal actin-binding
domain, has a rod domain constructed from six tandem repeats of a
100-residue motif that has an immunoglobulin fold.  To define the
architecture of the rod domain of gelation factor, we have expressed in E.
coli a series of constructs corresponding to different numbers of gelation
factor rod repeats and have characterised them by chemical crosslinking,
ultracentrifugation, column chromatography, matrix-assisted laser
desorption ionisation (MALDI) mass spectrometry and NMR spectroscopy.
Fragments corresponding to repeats 1-6 and 5-6 dimerise, whereas repeats
1-5 and single repeats 3 and 4 are monomeric.  Repeat 6 interacts weakly
and was present as monomer and dimer when analysed by analytical
ultracentrifugation. Proteolytic digestion of rod5-6 resulted in generation
of two polypeptides that roughly corresponded to rod5 and part of rod6.
None of these polypeptides formed dimers after chemical crosslinking.
Stable dimerisation therefore appears to require repeats 5 and 6.  Based on
these data a model of gelation factor architecture is presented.  We
suggest an arrangement of the chains where only the carboxy-terminal
repeats interact as was observed for filamin/ABP280, the mammalian
homologue of gelation factor. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A model for Dictyostelium slug movement

Till Bretschneider, Bakhtier Vasiev, Cornelis J. Weijer

Journal of Theoretical Biology (in press)

SUMMARY

   Dictyostelium slug movement results from the co-ordinated movement of its 
10e5 constituent cells. We have shown experimentally rotational cell movement 
in the tip and periodic forward movement of the cells in the back of the 
slug. To explain this mode of movement we have put forward the hypothesis 
that cell movement in slugs is controlled by chemotaxis to periodic cAMP 
waves coming from the tip. In the tip they propagate as scroll waves and 
convert to twisted scroll or planar waves in the back of the slug. The co-
ordinated movement of individual cells in response to these waves could 
then result in forward movement of the slug. To test this hypothesis we 
extend our model for aggregation and mound formation to include two cell 
types with different signalling and movement properties. In the model each 
cell is described as a cAMP relaying unit which interacts with neighbouring 
cells and moves chemotactically in response to cAMP gradients. Cells interact 
by adhesion, pressure and friction with neighbouring cells and the extracellular 
matrix. The model is capable of explaining scroll wave propagation and slug 
movement and allows us to understand the movement of an organism based on the 
properties of its constituent cells. We use the model to investigate the 
influence of cell type specific differences in excitability, adhesion and 
cell interactions on slug motion. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transient expression of a mitochondorial gene cluster including rps4 is 
essential for the phase-shift of Dictyostelium cells from growth to 
differentiation

Y. Inazu, S-C. Chae and Y. Maeda

Biological Institute, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University, 
Aoba, Sendai, Japan

Develop. Genetics, in press.

ABSTRACT  

   Using synchronized Dictyostelium discoideum Ax-2 cells and the 
differential display method, a mitochondrial gene cluster (referred to 
as differentiation-associated gene 3; dia3) was isolated as one of genes 
expressed specifically during the transition of Ax-2 cells from growth 
to differentiation. The dia3 gene encodes for a mitochondrial protein 
cluster (NADH dehydrogenase (NAD) subunit 11, 5, ribosomal protein S4 
(RPS4), RPS2 and NAD4L). Northern blot analysis using non-synchronized 
Ax-2 cells has shown that the dia3 RNA of about 8kb is scarcely 
expressed during the vegetative growth phase, and the maximal 
expression was attained at 2 hours after starvation. To analyze the
gene function of dia3, we tried inactivation of rps4 by means of 
homologous recombination and obtained several transformed clones 
showing mitochondrial DNA heteroplasmy. The transformed cells grew 
normally in nutrient medium, but their development after starvation 
was greatly impaired, thus resulting in failure of many cells to 
differentiate. In this connection, the cAMP receptor 1 (car1) 
expression, which is one of the earliest marker of differentiation, 
was found to be markedly reduced in the rps4 -inactivated cells.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Expression of prestalk and prespore proteins in minute, two-dimensional
Dictyostelium slugs

J. T. Bonner*, P. Fey, E. C. Cox

Departments of Ecology and Developmental Biology, and Molecular Biology
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544

Mechanisms of Develop., in press

Abstract

   We show that exceedingly small two-dimensional slugs of
Dictyostelium differentiate normally and have an anterior prestalk zone and
a posterior prespore zone.  Using GFP as a marker attached to the
appropriate promoter, prestalk expression is concentrated in the anterior,
while prespore expression is produced in the posterior, closely resembling
what is found in normal, large slugs.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The RdeA-RegA System: a Eukaryotic Phospho-Relay Controlling cAMP 
Breakdown

Peter A. Thomason, David Traynor, Jeffry B. Stock1, and Robert R. Kay

MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 2QH
U.K.

1Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton
New Jersey 08544

J. Biol. Chem., in press.
 
SUMMARY

   The regA and rdeA gene products of Dictyostelium are involved in the 
regulation of cAMP signaling.  The response regulator, RegA, is composed 
of an N-terminal receiver domain linked to a C-terminal cAMP-phosphodiesterase 
domain.  RdeA may be a phospho-transfer protein that supplies phosphates to 
RegA.  We show genetically that phospho-RegA is the activated form of the 
enzyme in vivo, in that the predicted site of aspartate phosphorylation is 
required for full activity.  We show biochemically that RdeA and RegA 
communicate, as evidenced by phospho-transfer between the two proteins 
in vitro.  Phospho-transfer is dependent on the presumed phospho-accepting 
amino acids, histidine 65 of RdeA and aspartate 212 of RegA, and occurs in 
both directions.  Phosphorylation of RegA by a heterologous phospho-donor 
protein activates RegA phosphodiesterase activity at least 20-fold.  Our 
results suggest that the histidine phosphotransfer protein, RdeA, and the 
response regulator, RegA, constitute two essential elements in a eukaryotic 
His-Asp phospho-relay network that regulates Dictyostelium development and 
fruiting body maturation.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 13, number 3]

  