Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 13, number 10
October 30, 1999

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

=============
  Abstracts
=============

LvsA, a protein related to the mouse beige protein, is required for
cytokinesis in Dictyostelium.

Eunice Kwak*, Noel Gerald*, Denis A. Larochelle*, Kalpa K. Vithalani*,
Maria L. Niswonger*, Melinda Maready* and Arturo De Lozanne*@

*Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC
27710
and
@Section of Molecular Cell & Developmental Biology, University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX 78712.

Molecular Biology of the Cell, in press (December, 1999)

ABSTRACT
We isolated a Dictyostelium cytokinesis mutant with a defect in a novel
locus called large volume sphere A (lvsA).  LvsA mutants exhibit an unusual
phenotype when attempting to undergo cytokinesis in suspension culture.
Early in cytokinesis, they initiate furrow formation with concomitant myosin
II localization at the cleavage furrow.  However, the furrow is later
disrupted by a bulge that forms in the middle of the cell.  This bulge is
bounded by furrows on both sides, which are often enriched in myosin II.
The bulge can increase and decrease in size multiple times as the cell
attempts to divide.  Interestingly, this phenotype is similar to the
cytokinesis failure of Dictyostelium clathrin heavy chain mutants.
Furthermore, both cell lines cap ConA receptors, but form only a C-shaped
loose cap.  Unlike clathrin mutants, lvsA mutants are not defective in
endocytosis or development.  The LvsA protein shares several domains in
common with the molecules beige and Chediak-Higashi syndrome proteins that
are important for lysosomal membrane traffic.  Thus, based on the sequence
analysis of the LvsA protein and the phenotype of the lvsA mutants, we
postulate that LvsA plays an important role in a membrane processing pathway
that is essential for cytokinesis. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Purification and Cloning of TF2: A Novel Protein that binds a Regulatory
Site of the gp2 Promoter in Dictyostelium

Nikita Warner and Charles L. Rutherford

Biology Department, Molecular and Cellular Biology Section,
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
Blacksburg, VA 24061-0406

Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics, In Press


ABSTRACT

	The glycogen phosphorylase-2 gene is developmentally regulated and
plays a central role in cellular differentiation in Dictyostelium.  There
are two isozymes of glycogen phosphorylase, GP1 and GP2.  Both forms are
developmentally regulated; gp1 is expressed in undifferentiated cells and
gp2 during differentiation.  We report here the identification,
purification and cloning of a second gp2 DNA-binding factor called TF2.
This protein demonstrates a high specificity for a transcriptional
regulatory element, the 5¢ C box.  TF2 was first detected with
electrophoretic mobility shift assays of DEAE chromatographic fractions of
cell-free extracts.  The specificity of TF2 for the 5¢ C box was tested by
competition analysis using six other oligonucleotides.  Purification of TF2
was achieved by ion-exchange chromatography, DNA affinity chromatography,
gel filtration chromatography, and preparative SDS-PAGE.  SDS-PAGE analysis
indicated an apparent subunit molecular weight of 28 kDa.  The apparent
molecular weight of the native protein as estimated by gel filtration was
about 53 kDa.  This suggested that TF2 binds gp2 as a homodimer.  Southern
blot analysis indicated that there is only one form of the tf2 gene.
Northern analysis showed little or no expression of tf2 in undifferentiated
cells.  During development tf2 expression increases up to a maximum at 8 h,
then decreases in later stages.  Attempts to disrupt the gene suggest that
tf2  mutation may be lethal.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Differential In Vitro Activation and Deactivation of Cysteine Proteinases 
Isolated During Spore Germination and Vegetative Growth of Dictyostelium 
discoideum 

Dora Cavallo, David Cervi, Todd W. Sands and David A. Cotter

Department of Biological Sciences, University of Windsor, Windsor 
Ontario, Canada,  N9B 3P4

Eur. J. Biochem., in press.

Summary

   Acid-activatable cysteine proteinases of D. discoideum were first 
identified in spore extracts of strain SG1 using gelatin-SDS-PAGE, followed 
by acid treatments. Here we utilized the technique of acid activation to 
identify cryptic cysteine proteinases throughout auto-induced and heat-
induced spore germination of D. discoideum strain SG2 and SG1. The major 
acid activatable cysteine proteinase identified in SG2 and SG1 spore 
extracts was ddCP38 (D. discoideum cysteine proteinase with a molecular 
weight of 38 kDa) and ddCP48, respectively. Further investigation of these 
enzymes revealed they were also base de-activatable with a treatment 
ammonium chloride directly following acid activation. However, the most 
intriguing observation was the reversibility of the effects of base 
deactivation on the enzymes following a second treatment with acetic 
acid. Thus, we hypothesize that, unlike most mammalian cysteine 
proteinases that generally require the cleavage of a pro-peptide 
region for activation, these cysteine proteinases of D. discoideum 
likely undergo reversible conformational changes between latent and 
active forms. Moreover, we were able to detect these cryptic cysteine 
proteinases in the vegetative cells and early aggregates of both 
strains SG1 and SG2. Studies using 4-[(2S,3S)-3-carboxyoxiran-2-
ylcarbonyl-L-leucylamido]butylguanidine, a cysteine proteinase 
inhibitor, revealed that acid activation of a portion of these 
proteinases was still achievable even after incubation with the 
inhibitor, further supporting the concept of two stable and 
reversible conformational arrangements of the enzymes. Thus, we 
speculate that the pH shuffles that modulate proteinase conformation 
and activity in vitro may be a reflection of the in vivo regulation 
of these enzymes via H+-ATPases and ammonia. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Circulation of the plasma membrane in Dictyostelium

by Carmen Aguado-Velasco and Mark S. Bretscher*

MRC Laboratory for Molecular Biology,
Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QH

Molecular Biology of the Cell, in press.

ABSTRACT

We have developed a fluorimetric assay using the dye FM1-43 to determine
the rate at which Dictyostelium amoebae endocytose their surface membrane.
Our results show that they do so about once each 4-10 minutes. A clathrin
null mutant takes its surface up only about 30% more slowly, showing that
this membrane uptake cannot be caused by clathrin-coated vesicles.
Surprisingly, Ax2 and its parent NC4, which differ in their rates of fluid
phase internalisation by about 60-fold, take up their surfaces at the same
rates. These results show that, in axenic cells, the uptake of fluid and of
surface area are separate processes. The large activity of this new
endocytic cycle in both Ax2 and NC4 amoebae appears capable of delivering
sufficient new surface area to advance the cells' fronts during migration.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The prespore vesicles of Dictyostelium discoideum: Purification,
Characterization and Developmental Regulation


Supriya Srinivasan, Hannah Alexander and Stephen Alexander*
Division of Biological Sciences
University of Missouri
Columbia, MO 65211

J. Biol. Chem., in press.

Abstract:

The coordinate fusion of the prespore vesicles (PSVs) with the plasma
membrane at the terminal stage of spore differentiation in Dictyostelium
discoideum is an important example of developmentally regulated protein
secretion. However, little is known about the composition of the vesicles,
the molecular signals regulating secretion or the mechanics of the
membrane fusion.  Taking a biochemical approach, we purified PSVs from
different developmental stages.   These preparations are highly enriched
for their specific cargo of spore coat proteins while devoid of markers
for other cellular compartments.  Electron microscopic observations show
that the PSV preparations are homogenous, with the soluble spore coat
protein PsB/SP85 distributed throughout the lumen and the acid
mucopolysaccharide localized in the central core.  During development the
PSVs increase in size and density concomitant with an increase in their
protein cargo.  The PSVs contain approximately 80 proteins, and we have
identified a PSV-specific GTP-binding protein which may be involved in
regulating vesicle fusion.  The PSVs are not clathrin coated, and do not
contain the SpiA spore coat protein.  The PSV preparations are ideal for a
global proteome analysis to identify proteins involved in signal
reception, vesicle movement, docking and fusion in this developmentally
regulated organelle.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 13, number 10]

  