Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 13, number 2
July 17, 1999

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

=============
  Abstracts
=============

Self-organized Vortex State in Two-dimensional Dictyostelium Dynamics

Wouter-Jan Rappel, Alastair Nicol, Armand Sarkissian, Herbert Levine,
and William F. Loomis

Depts. of Physics and Biology, University of California San Diego,
La Jolla, CA  92093

Phys. Rev. Letters,    in press

Abstract

We present results of experiments on the dynamics of Dictyostelium
discoideum in a novel set-up which constrains cell motion to a plane. After
aggregation, the amoebae collect into round ''pancake" structures in which
the cells rotate around the center of the pancake. This vortex state
persists for many hours and we have explicitly verified that the motion is
not due to rotating waves of cAMP. To provide an alternative mechanism for
the self organization of the Dictyostelium cells, we  have developed a new
model of the dynamics of  self-propelled deformable objects. In this model,
we show that cohesive energy between the cells, together with a coupling
between the self-generated propulsive force and the cell's configuration
produces a self-organized vortex state. The angular velocity profiles of
the experiment and of the model are in good quantitative agreement. The
mechanism for self organization reported here can possibly explain similar
vortex states in other biological systems.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Migration and thermotaxis of Dictyostelium discoideum slugs, 
a model study

Athanasius F.M. Marée, Alexander V. Panfilov and Paulien Hogeweg

Theoretical Biology and Bioinformatics, University of Utrecht,
Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands. E-mail:
S.Maree@bio.uu.nl.

J. theor. Biol., in press

ABSTRACT:

Dictyostelium discoideum slugs show a pronounced
thermotaxis. We have modelled the motion of the D. discoideum
slug in the absence and in the presence of a thermal gradient. Our
model is an extension of the hybrid cellular automata/partial
differential equation model, as formulated by Savill and Hogeweg,
J. theor. Biol., V.184, pp.229-235 (1997). The modelled slugs
maintain their shape and crawl, with a velocity depending on slug
size, as is found in experiments. Moreover, they show thermotactic
behaviour: independently of the initial orientation, after some
transient process the slugs start moving along the temperature
gradient. The slug behaviour in our model is due to the collective
behaviour of the amoebae. Individual amoebae can neither respond to a
shallow temperature gradient, nor show differentiation in motion
velocity. The behaviour is achieved by a modification of the cyclic
AMP waves: differences in temperature alter the excitability of the
cell, and therewith the shape of the cyclic AMP wave. Chemotaxis
towards cyclic AMP causes the slug to turn. We show that the mechanism
still functions at very low signal to noise ratios.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Phototaxis during the slug stage of Dictyostelium discoideum: 
a model study.

Athanasius F.M. Marée, Alexander V. Panfilov and Paulien Hogeweg

Theoretical Biology and Bioinformatics, University of Utrecht,
Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands. E-mail:
S.Maree@bio.uu.nl.

Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B, in press

ABSTRACT:

During the slug stage, the cellular slime mould Dictyostelium
discoideum moves towards light sources. We have modelled this
phototactic behaviour using a hybrid cellular automata/partial
differential equation model. In our model, individual amoebae are not
able to measure the direction from which the light comes, and
differences in light intensity do not lead to differentiation in
motion velocity among the amoebae. Nevertheless, the whole slug
orients itself towards the light. This behaviour is mediated by a
modification of the cyclic AMP(cAMP) waves. As an explanation for
phototaxis we propose the following mechanism, which is basically
characterised by four processes: (i) light is focused on the distal
side of the slug as a result of the so-called `lens-effect'; (ii)
differences in luminous intensity cause differences in NH_3
concentration; (iii) NH_3 alters the excitability of the cell, and
thereby the shape of the cAMP wave; (iv) chemotaxis towards cAMP
causes the slug to turn. We show that this mechanism can account for a
number of other behaviours that have been observed in experiments,
such as bidirectional phototaxis and the cancellation of
bidirectionality by a decrease in the light intensity or the addition of
charcoal to the medium.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Serpentine receptors and STAT activation: more than one way to twin a STAT

Jeffrey G.  Williams

Department of Anatomy and Physiology, University of Dundee, MSI/WTB 
Complex, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH
 
TIBS, in press

Summary

When a cytokine binds to its receptor an associated JAK (Janus kinase) is
activated and the JAK phosphorylates one or more STAT (Signal Transducer
and Activator of Transcription) proteins. Cytokine receptors are single
transmembrane-spanning domain proteins but recent work in mammals and in
the social amoeba Dictyostelium shows that seven transmembrane spanning
domain (serpentine) receptors also serve to activate STAT molecules. In
both Dictyostelium and mammals this activation appears to be independent of
heterotrimeric G proteins, suggesting that this, lesser-known pathway of
STAT activation may be evolutionarily conserved.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 13, number 2]

  