Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 13, number 6
September 11, 1999

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

====================
Postdoc Available
====================

NIH Funded Postdoctoral Postition: Structure and Function of the Cytoskeleton
Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut

   My laboratory is interested in the assembly and dynamics of the
actin cytoskeleton of motile cells. The mechanisms by which cells create
specific types of actin assemblies to carry out functions such as
phagocytosis, macropinocytosis, surface attachment and chemotactic motility
are being investigated.  Current projects focus on the role of different
isoforms of the Rac family of small G proteins in regulating actin
assembly, and the role of actin cross-linking proteins and myosin in
creating different cytoskeletal structures.  The work is being carried out
using a combination of biochemical, molecular genetic and advanced imaging
techniques in the model organism Dictyostelium discoideum.
   Candidates should have a PhD in an area of Cell or Molecular
Biology and enthusiasm to explore new areas in a multidisciplinary
approach.  Starting salary will be determined based on experience and
potential, and the position is for a minimum of 2 years with renewal
contingent on satisfactory performance.
   The University of Connecticut is located in rural Eastern
Connecticut in a safe and family friendly environment.  The University is
in the middle of a $1 billion building campaign and the lab will be moving
into a new facility in the Spring of 2000.  The combination of excellent
facilities and a rural lifestyle with proximity to Boston (1.5 hours) and
New York (2.5 hours) makes this an ideal location for those wish to do
cutting edge science in a relaxed environment.

Send vita and names and addresses (Email and phone) of 3 references to:

Dr. David Knecht
Molecular and Cell Biology U-125
University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269
e-mail:knecht@uconnvm.uconn.edu
web: http://www.sp.uconn.edu/~mcbstaff/knecht/knecht.html

=============
  Abstracts
=============

LbrA, a protein predicted to have a role in vesicle trafficking, is
necessary for normal morphogenesis in Polysphondylium pallidum.

Yoshinori Kawabe, Toshiteru Enomoto, Takahiro Morio, Hideko Urushihara, and
Yoshimasa Tanaka*

Institute of Biological Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-8572, Japan

Gene, in press

Abstract

        The fruiting body of Polysphondylium pallidum is composed of whorls
of branches along the axis of a central stalk. In the course of fruiting
body formation, the interval between neighboring whorls, and the number and
the spacing of  branches in a whorl are highly regulated. In this study,
using the REMI (restriction enzyme mediated integration) insertional
mutagenesis method, we obtained a mutant (strain M2323) with longer
branches than those of the wild-type strain PN500. The sequence analyses
revealed the presence of an ORF of 206 aa residues (23 kDa) near the vector
insertion site. Disruption of the gene, lbrA (long branch A), by homologous
recombination causes the same phenotype as that of M2323. A lbrA transcript
is expressed maximally at the early aggregation stage in the parental
strain, but not detectable in the REMI mutant. A homology search showed
that LbrA is a member of the p24 family proteins, which have been proposed
to function as receptors for cargo proteins that are transported by COP I-
(coat protein I) and / or COP II-coated vesicles between the endoplasmic
reticulum and the Golgi complex. As far as we know, this is the first paper
to show that a p24 family  member is implicated in morphogenesis.    

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOVEL CELLULAR TRACKS OF MIGRATING DICTYOSTELIUM CELLS

Kazuhiko Uchida and Shigehiko Yumura
Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Yamaguchi University, Yamaguchi 7
53-8512, Japan
 Eur. J. Cell Biol. in press.

Summary

     After Dictyostelium cells were settled on a coverslip and allowed to 
migrate freely on the surface, they were stained with fluorescently labeled 
Concanavalin A. Tracks with distinct patterns that consist of dots and short 
fibers were observed behind the cells. In this study, we refer to these 
tracks as 'cellular tracks', CTs for short. We characterized the biological 
effect of CTs on cell behavior and development. CTs decreased the strength 
of cell-substratum adhesion, increased the velocity of cell migration, but 
did not affect growth of cells. CTs also promoted cell aggregation. When 
pre-aggregation cells touched the CTs of other cells, they avoided or 
orthogonally crossed them, but did not migrate along them. These 
observations suggest that the CTs of pre-aggregation cells prompts cells 
to disperse uniformly on substratum and may enable cells to sense cell 
density. On the other hand, when aggregation-competent cells touched the 
CTs of other aggregation-competent cells, a half of them migrated along the 
CTs. Pre-aggregation cells did not migrate along the CTs of aggregation-
competent cells. The CTs of aggregation-competent cells may help the 
cells to aggregate toward the aggregation center.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------

DOMAIN ANALYSIS OF CORTEXILLIN I: ACTIN-BUNDLING, PIP2-BINDING AND THE
RESCUE OF CYTOKINESIS

Alexander Stock1, Michel O. Steinmetz2, Paul A. Janmey3, Ueli Aebi2, 
Günther Gerisch1*, Richard A. Kammerer2, Igor Weber1, and Jan Faix1


1 Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie, D-82152 Martinsried, Am Klopferspitz
18a, Germany,
2 Biozentrum der Universität  Basel, CH-4161 Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 70,
Switzerland,
3 Brigham & Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 221 Longwood Avenue,
Boston, USA
*Corresponding author: Günther Gerisch, Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie, 
D-82152 Martinsried, Germany. Tel.: (49) 89-8578-2326; Fax: (49)
89-8578-3885; 
e-mail: gerisch@biochem.mpg.de

EMBO Journal, in press

ABSTRACT:

   Cortexillins are actin-bundling proteins that form a parallel two-stranded
coiled-coil rod. Actin-binding domains of the alpha-actinin/spectrin type
are located N-terminal to the rod and unique sequence elements are found in
the C-terminal region. Domain analysis in vitro revealed that the
N-terminal domains are not responsible for the strong actin-filament
bundling activity of cortexillin I. The strongest activity resides in the
C-terminal region. Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) suppresses
this bundling activity by binding to a C-terminal nonapeptide sequence.
These data define a new PIP2-regulated actin-bundling site. In vivo the
PIP2-binding motif enhances localization of a C-terminal cortexillin I
fragment to the cell cortex and improves the rescue of cytokinesis. This
motif is not required, however, for translocation to the cleavage furrow. A
model is presented proposing that cortexillin translocation is based on a
mitotic cycle of polar actin polymerization and midzone depolymerization.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Cell-sorting in aggregates of Dictyostelium discoideum.

Alastair Nicol, Wouter-Jan Rappel, Herbert Levine and William F. Loomis
*Departments of Physics and Biology, UCSD, La Jolla, CA

J. Cell Science (in press)

SUMMARY

When Dictyostelium cells are induced to develop between a cover-slip and a
layer of agarose, they aggregate normally into groups containing up to a
thousand cells but are then constrained to form disks only a few cells
thick that appear to be equivalent to the three-dimensional mounds formed
on top of agarose.  Such vertically restricted aggregates frequently
develop into elongated motile structures, the flattened equivalent of three
dimensional slugs.  The advantage of using this system is that the
restricted z-dimension enables direct microscopic visualization of most of
the cells in the developing structure. We have used time lapse digital
fluorescence microscopy of Dictyostelium strains expressing green
fluorescent protein (GFP) under the control of either prestalk or prespore
specific promoters to follow cell sorting in these flattened mounds. We
find that prestalk and prespore cells expressing GFP arise randomly in
early aggregates and then rotate rapidly around the disk mixed with the
other cell type. After a few hours, the cell types sort out by a process
which involves striking changes in relative cell movement. Once sorted, the
cell types move independently of each other showing very little heterotypic
adhesion. When a group of prestalk cells reaches the edge of the disk, it
moves out and is followed by the prespore cell mass. We suggest that
sorting may result from cell type specific changes in adhesion and the
consequent disruption of movement in the files of cells that are held
together by end-to-end adhesion.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The contractile vacuole network of Dictyostelium as a distinct organelle:
its dynamics visualized by a GFP marker protein

Daniela Gabriel, Ulrike Hacker, Jana Koehler, Annette Mueller-Taubenberger,
Jean-Marc Schwartz, Monika Westphal and Guenther Gerisch

Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie  
D-82152 Martinsried, Germany

J. Cell Science, in press.

Summary

The contractile vacuole system is an osmoregulatory organelle composed of
cisternae and interconnecting ducts. Large cisternae act as bladders that
periodically fuse with the plasma membrane, forming pores to expel water
(Heuser et al. (1993) J. Cell Biol. 121, 1311-1327). To visualize the
entire network in vivo and to identify constituents of the vacuolar complex
in cell fractions, we introduced a specific marker into Dictyostelium
cells, GFP-tagged dajumin. The C-terminal, GFP-tagged region of this
transmembrane protein is responsible for sorting to the contractile vacuole
complex. Dajumin-GFP negligibly associates with the plasma membrane,
indicating its retention during discharge of the bladder. Fluorescent
labeled cell-surface constituents are efficiently internalized by
endocytosis, while no significant cycling through the contractile vacuole
is observed. Endosomes loaded with yeast particles or a fluid-phase marker
indicate sharp separation of the endocytic pathway from the contractile
vacuole compartment. Even after dispersion of the contractile vacuole
system during mitosis (Zhu et al. (1993) J. Cell Sci. 104, 1119-1127),
dajumin-GFP distinguishes the vesicles from endosomes, and visualizes
post-mitotic re-organization of the network around the nucleus. Highly
discriminative sorting and membrane fusion mechanisms are proposed to
account for the sharp separation of the contractile vacuole and endosomal
compartments. Evidence for a similar compartment in other eukaryotic cells
is discussed.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 13, number 6]

  