Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 13, number 12
December 4, 1999

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

=============
  Abstracts
=============

Functional Elements Within the Dynein Microtubule-Binding Domain.

Michael P. Koonce and Irina Tikhonenko

Division of Molecular Medicine, Wadsworth Center Albany, NY 12201-0509

Mol. Biol. Cell. in press (February 2000)

ABSTRACT.

   Dynein interacts with microtubules through an ATP-sensitive linkage mapped
to a structurally complex region of the heavy chain following the fourth
P-loop motif. Virtually nothing is known regarding how binding affinity is
achieved and modulated during ATP-hydrolysis. We have performed a detailed
dissection of the microtubule-contact site, using fragment expression,
alanine substitution, and peptide competition. Our work identifies three
clusters of amino acids important for the physical contact with
microtubules; two of these fall within a region sharing sequence homology
with MAP1B, the third in a region just downstream. Amino acid substitutions
within any one of these regions can eliminate or weaken microtubule binding
(KK3379,80, E3385, K3387, K3397, KK3410,11, W3414, RKK3418-20, F3426,
R3464, S3466, K3467), suggesting that their activities are highly
coordinated. A peptide that actively displaces MAP1B from microtubules
perturbs dynein binding, supporting prior evidence for similar sites of
interaction. We have also identified four amino acids whose substitutions
affect release of the motor from the microtubule (E3413, R3444, E3460,
C3469). These suggest that nucleotide-sensitive affinity may be locally
controlled, at the site of contact. Our work is the first detailed
description of dynein-tubulin interactions and provides a framework for
understanding how affinity is achieved and modulated.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Dictyostelium RasS Protein is Required for Macropinocytosis, 
Phagocytosis and the Control of Cell Movement

Jonathan R. Chubb, Andrew Wilkins, Geraint M. Thomas and
Robert H. Insall

J. Cell Sci., in press.

Abstract

   Endocytosis and cell migration both require transient localised 
remodelling of the cell cortex.  Several lines of evidence suggest a 
key regulatory role in these activities for members of the Ras family 
of small GTPases.  We have generated Dictyostelium cells lacking one 
member of this family, RasS, and the mutant cells are perturbed in 
endocytosis and cell migration.  Mutant amoebae are defective in 
phagocytosis and fluid-phase endocytosis and are impaired in growth. 
Conversely, the rasS- cells show an enhanced rate of cell migration, 
moving three times faster than wild-type controls.  The mutant cells 
display an aberrant morphology, are highly polarised, carry many 
elongated actin protrusions and show a concomitant decrease in 
formation of pinocytic crowns on the cell surface.  These 
morphological aberrations are paralleled by changes in the actin 
cytoskeleton, with a significant proportion of the cortical F-actin 
relocalised to prominent pseudopodia.  Rapid migration and 
endocytosis appear to be mutually incompatible and it is likely that 
RasS protein is required to maintain the normal balance between these 
two actin-dependent processes.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dictyostelium Myosin IK is Involved in the Maintenance of Cortical Tension
and Affects Motility and Phagocytosis

Eva C. Schwarz, Eva M. Neuhaus, Claudia Kistler, Andreas W. Henkel, and
Thierry Soldati#

Department of Molecular Cell Research, Max-Planck-Institute for Medical
Research, Jahnstrasse 29, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany

#Corresponding author:	Tel: +49-6221-486407 / Fax: +49-6221-486325 / 
E-mail: soldati@mzf.mpimf-heidelberg.mpg.de

Journal of Cell Science, in press

Summary

   Dictyostelium discoideum MyoK is a novel type of myosin distinguished 
by a remarkable architecture. MyoK is related to class I myosins but lacks 
a cargo-binding tail domain and carries an insertion in a surface loop
suggested to modulate motor velocity. This insertion shows similarity to a
secondary actin-binding site present in the tail of some class I myosins,
and indeed a GST-loop construct binds actin. As a likely consequence,
binding of MyoK to actin was not only ATP- but also salt-dependent.
Moreover, as both binding sites reside within its motor domain and carry
potential sites of regulation, MyoK might represent a new form of actin
crosslinker. MyoK was distributed in the cytoplasm with a significant
enrichment in dynamic regions of the cortex. Absence of MyoK resulted in a
drop of cortical tension whereas overexpression led to significantly
increased tension. Absence and overexpression of MyoK dramatically affected
the cortical actin cytoskeleton and resulted in reduced initial rates of
phagocytosis. Cells lacking MyoK showed excessive ruffling, mostly in the
form of large lamellipodia, accompanied by a thicker basal actin cortex. At
early stages of development, aggregation of myoK null cells was slowed due
to reduced motility. Altogether, the data indicate a distinctive role for
MyoK in the maintenance and dynamics of the cell cortex.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

5' Nucleotidase in Dictyostelium:: Protein Purification, Cloning, and 
Developmental Expression.

Chanpen Chanchao, Can M. Eristi, Reyna Favis and Charles L. Rutherford.

Biology Department, Molecular and Cellular Biology Section, Virginia 
Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA 24061-0406

Biochimica et Biophysica Acta, In Press

5' Nucleotidase (5NU) in Dictyostelium discoideum is an enzyme that shows 
high substrate specificity to 5'AMP. The enzyme has received considerable 
attention in the past because of the critical role played by cyclic AMP in 
cell differentiation in this organism. Degradation of cAMP by cAMP 
phosphodiesterase (PDE) produces 5'AMP, the substrate of 5NU. During the 
time course of development, the enzyme activity of 5NU increases and 
becomes restricted to a narrow band of cells that form the interface 
between the prestalk/prespore zones. We have purified a polypeptide 
associated with 5NU enzyme activity. Protein sequence of this peptide 
was obtained from Mass Spectrometry and Edman Degradation. PCR 
amplification of genomic DNA using degenerate oligonucleotides and a 
search of sequences of a cDNA project yielded DNA fragments with sequence 
corresponding to the peptide sequence of 5NU. In addition, a clone was 
found that corresponded to the classical "alkaline phosphatase" (AP) as 
described in several organisms. The sequences of the 5NU and AP cDNAs 
were not similar, indicating they are the products of separate genes and 
that both genes exist in Dictyostelium. Analysis of the expression of 
5nu during Dictyostelium development by Northern blotting determined that 
the gene is developmentally regulated. Southern blot analysis showed a 
single form of the 5nu gene. Targeted gene disruption and knockout 
mutagenesis using the 5nu sequences suggested that a 5nu mutation may 
be lethal.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 13, number 12]

  