Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 18, number 4
March 2, 2002

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at DictyBase--http://dictybase.org.


=============
  Abstracts
=============

Correlates of developmental cell death in Dictyostelium discoideum

Trupti Kawli, B.R. Venkatesh, P. Kevin Kennady*, Gopal Pande* and Vidyanand 
Nanjundiah

Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, India and *Centre for Cellular 
and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad 500007

Differentiation, in press

ABSTRACT

We have studied the correlates of cell death during normal development in 
Dictyostelium discoideum. Our main findings are four. (i) There is a 
gradual increase in the number of cells with exposed phosphatidyl serine 
residues, an indicator of membrane asymmetry loss and increased permeability. 
Only presumptive stalk cells show this change in membrane asymmetry. Also, 
under conditions that promote calcium-induced stalk cell differentiation in 
cell monolayers, cells show an increase in cell membrane permeability. (ii) 
There is a gradual fall in mitochondrial membrane potential during 
development, again restricted to the presumptive stalk cells. (iii) The 
fraction of cells showing caspase-3 activity increases as development 
proceeds and then declines in the terminally differentiated fruiting body. 
(iv) There is an absence of internucleosomal cleavage of DNA, or DNA 
fragmentation. There is also no calcium and magnesium-dependent 
endonucleolytic activity seen in nuclear extracts from various developmental 
stages. However, nuclear condensation and peripheralization does occur in 
stalk cells.  Thus, cell death in D.discoideum shows some, but not all, 
features of apoptosis as recognized in other multicellular systems. These 
findings argue against the emergence of a single mechanism of 'programmed 
cell death (PCD)' before multicellularity arose during evolution. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Lamellipodial localization of Dictyostelium myosin heavy chain kinase A is 
mediated via F-actin binding by the coiled-coil domain

Paul A. Steimle(a), Lucila Licate(b), Graham P. Ct(c), and Thomas T. 
Egelhoff(b)

(a)Department of Biology University of North Carolina at Greensboro, 
Greensboro, NC 27402; (b)Department of Physiology and Biophysics Case Western 
Reserve School of Medicine Cleveland, OH 44106; (c) Department of 
Biochemistry, Queen s University Kingston, Ontario, CANADA

FEBS Letters, In Press

ABSTRACT

Myosin heavy chain kinase A (MHCK A) modulates myosin II filament assembly in 
the amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum. MHCK A localization in vivo is 
dynamically regulated during chemotaxis, phagocytosis, and other polarized 
cell motility events, with preferential recruitment into anterior F-actin 
rich structures. The current work reveals that an amino-terminal segment of 
MHCK A, previously identified as forming a coiled-coil, mediates anterior 
localization. MHCK A co-sediments with F-actin, and deletion of the amino-
terminal domain eliminated actin binding. These results indicate that the 
anterior localization of MHCK A is mediated via direct binding to F-actin, 
and reveal the presence of an actin-binding function not previously detected 
by primary sequence evaluation of the coiled-coil domain.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Genetic and morphological evidence for two parallel pathways of cell cycle-
coupled cytokinesis in Dictyostelium.

Akira Nagasaki1, Eugenio L. de Hostos2 and Taro Q.P. Uyeda1

1: Gene Discovery Research Center, National Institute of Advanced Industrial 
Science and Technology, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8562, Japan; 2: Department of 
Cell Genetics, Exelixis Inc., South San Francisco, CA 94083-0511, USA


J. Cell. Sci., in press.

SUMMARY

Myosin II-null cells of Dictyostelium discoideum cannot divide in 
suspension, consistent with the dogma that myosin II drives constriction 
of the cleavage furrow, and consequently, cytokinesis (cytokinesis A).  
Nonetheless, when grown on substrates, these cells exhibit efficient, cell 
cycle-coupled division, suggesting that they possess a novel, myosin II-
independent, adhesion-dependent method of cytokinesis (cytokinesis B).  
Here we show that double mutants lacking myosin II and either AmiA or 
coronin, both of which are implicated in cytokinesis B, are incapable of 
cell cycle-coupled cytokinesis.  These double mutants multiplied in number 
mainly by cytokinesis C, a third, inefficient method of cell division, which 
requires substrate adhesion and is independent on the cell cycle progression.  
In contrast, double mutants lacking AmiA and coronin were not sicker than 
each of the single mutant, indicating that the severe defects of myosin II-/
AmiA- or myosin II-/coronin- are not simple additive effects of two mutations.  
We take this as genetic evidence for two parallel pathways that both lead to 
cell cycle-coupled cytokinesis.  This conclusion is supported by differences 
in morphological changes during cytokinesis of the mutant cell lines.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mini review: Gene expression patterns in Dictyostelium using microarrays

Gad Shaulsky and William F. Loomis

Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030. Division of Biology, University of California, San Diego, 
La Jolla, CA 92093.

Protist  (in press)

(no abstract)

The promises and perils of microarray analyses of gene expression are 
considered and the results from recent microarray studies in Dictyostelium 
compared and summarized. The avenues open for future microarray studies are 
briefly discussed.


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 18, number 4]
