Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 18, number 5
March 30, 2002

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at DictyBase--http://dictybase.org.


=============
  Abstracts
=============
A putative serpentine receptor gene tasA required for normal morphogenesis 
of primary stalk and branch structure in Polysphondylium pallidum.


Yoshinori Kawabe, Hidekazu Kuwayama, Takahiro Morio, Hideko Urushihara, and 
Yoshimasa Tanaka

Gene 285, 291-299 (2002)

Abstract


         The fruiting body of Polysphondylium pallidum is composed of 
whorls of branches along the axis of a primary stalk. In the course of 
fruiting body formation, the interval between neighboring whorls and the 
number and the spacing of branches in a whorl are highly regulated. In this 
study, using REMI (restriction enzyme mediated integration) mutagenesis, we 
have obtained a mutant (strain M6226) with thicker and aberrant primary 
stalk. The gene responsible for the mutant phenotype, confirmed by 
homologous recombination, encodes an ORF with 383 aa residues (46.3 kDa) 
and was named tasA (thick and aberrant stalk A). TasA is highly homologous 
to Dictyostelium discoideum cAMP receptors. A tasA transcript is expressed 
strictly at the late aggregation stage. Cells expressing a tasA::gfp fusion 
DNA are localized at the posterior region of the primary sorogen where 
secondary sorogens and branches originate. This result indicates the 
existence of "prebranch" and "pretrunk" regions in P. pallidum instead of 
the prespore and prestalk regions in D. discoideum. The analyses of the 
gene disruptant and chimeric fruiting bodies also suggests that TasA 
affects the normal morphogenesis of the primary stalk and the process of 
cell differentiation into prebranch cells, but not into spore or stalk 
cells directly. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Expression and One Step Purification of a Developmentally Regulated Protein 
from Dictyostelium discoideum

Muatasem Ubeidat and Charles L. Rutherford*

Biology Department, Molecular and Cellular Biology Section, Virginia 
Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA 24061-0406, USA

Accepted for publication in: Protein Expression and Purification

ABSTRACT

To overexpress Dictyostelium 5NT, a 1506 bp fragment of the cDNA encoding 
the gene was cloned into a pET32c+ vector and expressed in the E. coli 
expression host BL21 CodonPlus"!(DE3)-RIL by Isopropyl-b-D-thiogalactoside 
(IPTG) induction.  Maximum induction of insoluble recombinant protein was 
reached after incubation of the culture for 3 h with 1.0 mM IPTG.  High 
level of 5NT expression was confirmed by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting 
analysis.  The recombinant 5NT was purified to homogeneity by a one step 
purification using continuous-elution electrophoresis.  Ten mg of 
recombinant 5NT was purified per liter of growth medium.  To achieve one 
of the goals of this study, polyclonal antibody against the recombinant 
5NT was produced in a rabbit.  We have shown previously by Northern analysis 
and reporter gene analysis that 5nt is developmentally regulated.  In this 
report we used polyclonal antibody against the recombinant protein in 
Western analysis of membrane protein extracts from different developmental 
stages of Dictyostelium.  5NT protein levels were first detected at the 
tight aggregation stage of development.  Thus, there is no significant 
delay between transcription and translation of 5nt.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A novel disintegrin domain protein affects early cell type specification and 
pattern formation in Dictyostelium.

Timothy R. Varney, Hoa Ho,  Chere   Petty,  and Daphne D. Blumberg 

Department of Biological Sciences, University of Maryland Baltimore County, 
1000 Hilltop Circle, Baltimore, Maryland 21250

Development,  in press

SUMMARY
       The cellular slime mold, Dictyostelium discoideum is a non-metazoan 
organism yet we demonstrate here that a disintegrin domain containing 
protein, the product of the ampA gene, plays a role in cell type 
specification. Disintegrin domain containing proteins are involved in 
Notch signaling in Drosophila and C. elegans by an ectodomain shedding 
mechanism that depends on a metalloprotease domain. The Dictyostelium 
protein lacks a metalloprotease domain. Nonetheless, analysis of cell 
type specific reporter gene expression during development of the ampA null 
strain identifies patterning defects that define two distinct roles for the 
AmpA protein in specifying cell fate. In the absence of a functional ampA 
gene, cells prematurely specify as prespore cells. Prestalk cell 
differentiation and migration are delayed. Both of these defects can be 
rescued by the inclusion of  10% wild-type cells in the developing null 
mutant aggregates, indicating that the defect is non-cell autonomous. The 
ampA gene is also demonstrated to be necessary in a cell autonomous manner 
for the correct localization of anterior-like cells to the upper cup of the 
fruiting body. When derived from ampA null cells, the anterior-like cells 
are unable to localize to positions in the interior of the developing mounds. 
Wild-type cells can rescue defects in morphogenesis by substituting for null 
cells when they differentiate as anterior-like cells but they can not rescue 
the ability of ampA null cells to fill this role.  Thus, in spite of its 
simpler structure, the Dictyostelium ampA protein carries out the same 
diversity of functions that have been observed for the ADAM and ADAMTS 
families in metazoans.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Nucleomorphin: A novel, acidic, nuclear calmodulin-binding protein from 
Dictyostelium that regulates nuclear number

Michael A. Myre* and Danton H. O Day*

*University of Toronto at Mississauga, Department of Zoology, 3359 
Mississauga Rd. Rm. 3030, Mississauga, ON. L5L 1C6 Canada

J. Biol. Chem., in press

Probing of Dictyostelium discoideum cell extracts after SDS-PAGE using 
35S-recombinant calmodulin as a probe has revealed approximately three-dozen 
Ca2+-dependent calmodulin binding proteins. Here, we report the molecular 
cloning, expression and subcellular localization of a gene encoding a novel 
CaMBP, we have called nucleomorphin, from D. discoideum. A ZAP cDNA 
expression library of cells from multicellular development was screened 
using a recombinant calmodulin probe (35S-VU1-CaM). The open reading frame 
of 1119 nucleotides encodes a polypeptide of 340 amino acids with a 
calculated molecular weight of 38.7 kDa, and is constitutively expressed 
throughout the Dictyostelium life cycle. Nucleomorphin contains a highly 
acidic glutamic/aspartic acid inverted repeat (DEED) with significant 
similarity to the conserved nucleoplasmin domain, and a putative 
transmembrane domain in the carboxyl-terminal region. Southern blotting 
reveals that nucleomorphin exists as a single copy gene. Using gel overlay 
assays and CaM-agarose we show that bacterially expressed nucleomorphin 
binds to bovine CaM in a Ca2+-dependent manner. Amino-terminal fusion to 
the green fluorescent protein showed that GFP-NumA localized to the nucleus 
as distinct arc like patterns similar to heterochromatin regions. GFP-NumA 
lacking the acidic DEED repeat still showed arc-like accumulations at the 
nuclear periphery but the number of nuclei in these cells was increased 
markedly compared to control cells. Cells expressing GFP-NumA lacking the 
transmembrane domain localized to the nuclear periphery, but did not affect 
nuclear number or gross morphology. Nucleomorphin is the first nuclear CaMBP 
to be identified in Dictyostelium. Furthermore, this data presents the first 
identification of a member of the nucleoplasmin family as a calmodulin-
binding protein and suggests nucleomorphin has a role in nuclear structure 
in Dictyostelium.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dictyostelium EB1 is a genuine centrosomal component required for proper 
spindle formation

Markus Rehberg and Ralph Grf*

Adolf-Butenandt-Institut / Zellbiologie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitt 
Mnchen, Schillerstrasse 42, D-80336 Mnchen, Germany.

Mol. Biol. Cell, in press

EB1 proteins are ubiquitous microtubule-associated proteins involved in 
microtubule search-and-capture, regulation of microtubule dynamics, cell 
polarity and chromosome stability. We have cloned a complete cDNA of 
Dictyostelium EB1 (DdEB1), the largest known EB1 homologue (57 kDa). 
Immunofluorescence analysis and expression of a GFP-DdEB1 fusion protein 
revealed that DdEB1 localizes along microtubules, at microtubule tips, 
centrosomes and protruding pseudopods. During mitosis, it was found at the 
spindle, spindle poles and kinetochores. DdEB1 is the first EB1-homologue 
which is also a genuine centrosomal component, because it was localized at 
isolated centrosomes that are free of microtubules. Furthermore, centrosomal 
DdEB1 distribution was unaffected by nocodazole treatment. DdEB1 colocalized 
with DdCP224, the XMAP215 homologue, at microtubule tips, the centrosome and 
kinetochores. Furthermore, both proteins were part of the same cytosolic 
protein complex suggesting that they may act together in their functions. 
DdEB1 deletion mutants expressed as GFP or maltose-binding fusion proteins 
indicated that microtubule binding requires homo-oligomerization which is 
mediated by a coiled-coil domain. A DdEB1 null mutant was viable but 
retarded in prometaphase progression due to a defect in spindle formation. 
As spindle elongation was normal, DdEB1 seems to be required for the 
initiation of the outgrowth of spindle microtubules.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 18, number 5]
