Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 18, number 1
January 12, 2002

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at DictyBase--http://dictybase.org.


=============
  Abstracts
=============

A Novel Dictyostelium Gene Encoding Multiple Repeats of Adhesion Inhibitor-
Like Domains has Effects on Cell-Cell and Cell-Substrate Adhesion.

Timothy R. Varney, Elisabeth Casademunt, Hoa N. Ho, Chere' Petty, Jayne 
Dolman, and Daphne D. Blumberg*

Department of Biological Sciences, University of Maryland Baltimore County, 
1000 Hilltop Circle, Baltimore, Maryland 21250

Developmental Biology in press

Abstract
    The Dictyostelium protein AmpA (Adhesion modulation protein A) is 
encoded by the gene originally identified by the D11 cDNA clone.  AmpA 
contains repeated domains homologous to a variety of proteins that influence 
cell adhesion.  The protein accumulates during development, reaching a 
maximal level at the finger stage.  Much of the AmpA protein is found 
extracellularly during development, and in culminants AmpA is found in 
association with Anterior-Like Cells.  Characterization of an ampA- strain 
generated by gene replacement reveals a significant increase in cell-cell 
clumping when cells are starved in non-nutrient buffer suspensions.  
Developing ampA- cells are also more adhesive to the underlying substrate 
and are delayed in developmental progression, with the severity of the delay 
increasing as cells are grown in the presence of bacteria or on tissue 
culture dishes rather than in suspension culture.  Reintroduction of the 
ampA gene rescues the developmental defects of ampA- cells however 
expression of additional copies of the gene in wild type cells results 
in more severe developmental delays and decreased clumping in suspension 
culture.  We propose that the AmpA protein functions as an anti-adhesive 
to limit cell-cell and cell-substrate adhesion during development and thus 
facilitate cell migration during morphogenesis.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A Gene Encoding a Novel Anti-Adhesive Protein is Expressed in Growing Cells 
and Restricted to Anterior-Like Cells During Development of Dictyostelium. 

Elisabeth Casademunt, Timothy R. Varney, Jayne Dolman, Chere' Petty and 
Daphne D. Blumberg*

Department of Biological Sciences, University of Maryland Baltimore County, 
1000 Hilltop Circle, Baltimore, Maryland 21250

Differentiation, in press

Abstract 
    The Dictyostelium gene ampA, initially identified by the D11 cDNA, 
encodes a novel anti-adhesive-like protein.  The ampA gene product inhibits 
premature cell agglutination during growth and modulates cell-cell and cell-
substrate adhesion during development.  Analysis of the promoter indicates 
that cap site-proximal sequence directs ampA expression during both growth 
and early development.  Expression following tip formation is controlled by 
more distal sequence, which contains TTGA repeats known to regulate prestalk 
cell gene expression in other promoters.
    Comparison of reporter gene expression and endogenous mRNA accumulation 
indicate that during growth the ampA gene is expressed in an increasing 
number of cells as a function of density.  The number of cells expressing 
the ampA gene drops as development initiates, but the cells that continue 
to express the gene do so at high levels.  These cells are initially 
scattered throughout the entire aggregate.  By the tip formation stage 
however, the majority of ampA-expressing cells are localized to the mound 
periphery, with only a few cells remaining scattered in the upper portion 
of the mound.  In the final culminant, ampA is expressed only in the upper 
cup, lower cup and basal disc.  Although reporter expression is observed 
in cells that migrate anteriorly to a banded region just posterior to the 
tip, expression is rarely observed in the extreme tip.  AmpA protein 
however, is localized to the tip as well as to ALCs during late 
development.  The results presented here suggest that ampA gene expression 
is shut off in ALCs that continue along the prestalk differentiation 
pathway before they are added to the primordial stalk.


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Deducing the Origin of Soluble Adenylyl Cyclase, a Gene Lost 
in Multiple Lineages

Jeroen Roelofs and Peter J.M. Van Haastert

Department of Biochemistry, University of Groningen, 
Nijenborgh 4, 9747 AG Groningen, the Netherlands

Molecular Biology and Evolution, in press

The family of eukaryotic adenylyl cyclases consists of a very 
large group of twelve transmembrane adenylyl cyclases and a 
very small group of soluble adenylyl cyclase (sAC). Orthologs of 
human sAC are present in rat, Dictyostelium and bacteria, but 
absent from the completely sequenced genomes of Drosophila 
melanogaster, Caenorhabditis elegans, Arabidopsis thaliana and 
Saccharomyces cereviciae. sAC consists of two cyclase 
domains and a long ~1000 amino acid C-terminal (sCKH) 
region. This sCKH region and one cyclase domain have been 
found in only four bacterial genes; the sCKH region was also 
detected in bacterial Lux transcription factors and in complex 
bacterial and fungal kinases. The phylogenies of the kinase and 
cyclase domains are identical to the phylogeny of the 
corresponding sCKH domain, suggesting that the sCKH region 
fused with the other domains early during evolution in bacteria. 
The amino acid sequences of sAC proteins yield divergence 
times from the human lineage for rat and Dictyostelium that are 
close to the reported divergence times of many other proteins in 
these species. The combined results suggest that the sCKH 
region was fused with one cyclase domain in bacteria, and a 
second cyclase domain was added in bacteria or early 
eukaryotes. The sAC was retained in a few bacteria and during 
the entire evolution of the human lineage, but lost independently 
from many bacteria and in the lineages to plants, yeast, worms 
and flies. We conclude that within the family of adenylyl 
cyclases, soluble AC was poorly fixed during evolution while 
membrane bound AC has expanded to form the subgroups of 
prevailing adenylyl and guanylyl cyclases. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Characterization of Two Unusual Guanylyl cyclases from Dictyostelium

Jeroen Roelofs  and Peter J.M. Van Haastert

GBB, Department of Biochemistry, University of Groningen

J. Biol. Chem., in press

GCA and sGC encode guanylyl cyclases (GC) in Dictyostelium, and have a 
topology similar to twelve- transmembrane and soluble adenylyl cyclase, 
respectively. We demonstrate that all detectable GC activity is lost in 
a cell line in which both genes have been inactivated. Cell lines with one 
gene inactivated were used to characterize the other guanylyl cyclase 
(i.e. GCA in sgc- null cells, and sGC in gca- null cells). Despite the 
different topologies, the enzymes have many properties in common. In vivo, 
extracellular cAMP activates both enzymes via a G-protein coupled receptor. 
In vitro, both enzymes are activated by GTPgS (Ka = 11 and 8 mM for GCA and 
sGC, respectively); addition of GTPgS leads to a 1.5-fold increase of 
Vmax and a 3.5-fold increase of the affinity for GTP. Ca2+ inhibits 
both GCA and sGC with Ki of about 50 and 200 nM, 
respectively.  Other biochemical properties are very different; 
GCA is mainly expressed during growth and multicellular 
development, while sGC is mainly expressed during cell 
aggregation. Folic acid and cAMP activate GCA maximally 
about 2.5-fold, whereas sGC is activated about 8-fold. Osmotic 
stress strongly stimulates sGC, but has no effect on GCA 
activity. Finally, GCA is exclusively membrane bound and mainly 
active with Mg2+, while sGC is predominantly soluble and more 
active with Mn2+.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A Transcriptional Profile of Multicellular Development in Dictyostelium 
discoideum

Nancy Van Driessche 1,2,10, Chad Shaw 1,10, Mariko Katoh 6,10, Takahiro 
Morio 6, Richard Sucgang 3, Miroslava Ibarra 1, Hidekazu Kuwayama 6, Tamao 
Saito 7, Hideko Urushihara 6, Mineko Maeda 8, Ikuo Takeuchi 9, Hiroshi 
Ochiai 7, William Eaton 5, Jeffrey Tollett 1,4, John Halter 5, Adam 
Kuspa 1,2,3, Yoshimasa Tanaka 6, and Gad Shaulsky 1,2,11.

1 Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, 2 Graduate Program in 
Developmental Biology, 3 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
4 DNA Array Core Facility, 5 Department of PM&R and Division of Neuroscience, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston TX 77030, USA; 6 Institute of Biological 
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, 7 Division of Biological Sciences, 
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, 8 Department of Biology, Osaka University, 
Osaka, 9 Novartis Foundation for the Promotion of Science, Takarazuka, Japan.
10 These authors contributed equally to this work

Development, in press.

SUMMARY

A distinct feature of development in the simple eukaryote Dictyostelium 
discoideum is an aggregative transition from a unicellular to a multicellular 
phase.  Using genome-wide transcriptional analysis we show that this 
transition is accompanied by a dramatic change in the expression of more 
than 25% of the genes in the genome.  We also show that the transcription 
patterns of these genes are not sensitive to the strain or the nutritional 
history, indicating that Dictyostelium development is a robust physiological 
process that is accompanied by stereotypical transcriptional events.  
Analysis of the two differentiated cell types, spores and stalk cells, and 
their precursors revealed a large number of differentially expressed genes 
as well as unexpected patterns of gene expression that shed new light on 
the timing and possible mechanisms of cell-type divergence.  Our findings 
provide new perspectives on the complexity of the developmental program 
and the fraction of the genome that is regulated during development.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Cytoplasmic Dynein-Associated Structures Move Bidirectionally in vivo

Shuo Ma and Rex L. Chisholm

Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, and Center for Genetic Medicine, Northwestern University 
Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60611

J. Cell Sci., in press.

Summary

Intracellular organelle transport is driven by motors that act upon 
microtubules or microfilaments.  Microtubule-based motors, cytoplasmic 
dynein and kinesins, are believed to be responsible for retrograde and 
anterograde transport of intracellular cargo along microtubules.  Many 
vesicles display bidirectional movement, however, the mechanism regulating 
directionality is unresolved.  Directional movement might be accomplished 
by alternate binding of different motility factors to the cargo.  
Alternatively, different motors could associate with the same cargo and 
have their motor activity regulated.  While several studies have focused 
on the behavior of specific types of cargos, little is known about the 
traffic of the motors themselves and how it correlates with cargo movement.  
To address this question, we studied cytoplasmic dynein dynamics in living 
Dictyostelium cells expressing dynein intermediate chain-green fluorescent 
protein (IC-GFP) fusion in an IC-null background.  Dynein-associated 
structures display fast linear movement along microtubules in both minus-end 
and plus-end directions, with the velocities similar to that of dynein and 
kinesin-like motors.  In addition, dynein puncta often rapidly reverse 
direction.  Dynein stably associates with cargo moving in both directions 
as well as with those that rapidly reverse their direction of movement, 
suggesting that directional movement is not regulated by altering motor-
cargo association, but rather by switching activity of motors associated 
with the cargo.  These observations suggest that both plus- and minus-end 
directed motors associate with a given cargo and that coordinated 
regulation of motor activities controls vesicle directionality.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 18, number 1]
