Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 18, number 2
January 26, 2002

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at DictyBase--http://dictybase.org.


=============
  Abstracts
=============

Molecular analysis of the cytosolic Dictyostelium gamma-tubulin complex

Christine Daunderer and Ralph Grf

Adolf-Butenandt-Institut/Zellbiologie, Universitt Mnchen, Germany 
Ralph.Graef@lrz.uni-muenchen.de

Eur. J. Cell Biol., in press

   Gamma-tubulin plays an essential role in microtubule nucleation and 
organization and occurs, besides its centrosomal localization, in the 
cytosol, where it forms soluble complexes with other proteins. We 
investigated the size and composition of gamma-tubulin-complexes in 
Dictyostelium, using a mutant cell line in which the endogenous copy of 
the gamma-tubulin gene had been replaced by a tagged version of the gene. 
Dictyostelium gamma-tubulin complexes were generally much smaller than the 
large gamma-tubulin ring complexes found in higher organisms. The stability 
of the small Dictyostelium gamma-tubulin complexes depended strongly on the 
purification conditions, with a striking stabilization of the complexes 
under high salt conditions. Furthermore, we cloned the Dictyostelium homolog 
of Spc97 and an almost complete sequence of the Dictyostelium homolog of 
Spc98, which are both components of gamma-tubulin complexes in other 
organisms. Both proteins localize to the centrosome in Dictyostelium 
throughout the cell cycle and are also present in a cytosolic pool. We 
could show that the prevailing small complex present in Dictyostelium 
consists of DdSpc98 and gamma-tubulin, whereas DdSpc97 does not associate. 
Dictyostelium is thus the first organism investigated so far where the 
three proteins do not interact stably in the cytosol.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Visualization of Actin Dynamics During Macropinocytosis and Exocytosis

Eunkyung Lee and David A. Knecht

Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut       
Storrs, CT 06269

Traffic, in press

   Macropinocytosis and exocytosis of post-lysosomes have been visualized 
using an GFP probe that binds specifically to F-actin filaments.  F-actin 
association with macropinocytosis begins as a V-shaped infolding of the 
membrane.  Vesicle enlargement occurs through an inward movement of the 
proximal point of the V as well as an outward protrusion at the tip of the 
V to form an elongated invagination.  The protrusion eventually closes at 
its distal margin to become a vesicle and is moved centripetally while 
recovering its circular shape.  The vesicle loses its actin coat within one 
minute after internalization.  One hour later, post-lysosomal vesicles 
became very weakly surrounded by actin while still cytoplasmic.  Some of 
these vesicles moved to the plasma membrane, docked, and then expelled their 
contents.  Slightly before the vesicle content began to disappear, an 
increase in F-actin association with the vesicle was observed.  This was 
followed by rapid contraction of the vesicle and then disappearance of the 
actin signal once the internal content was released.  These results show 
that dynamic changes in actin filament association with the vesicle membrane 
accompany both endocytosis and exocytosis.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dynacortin is a novel actin bundling protein that localizes to dynamic actin 
structures.  

Douglas N. Robinson*, Stephani S. Ocon, Ronald S. Rock and James A. Spudich

Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
CA  94305-5307

*Contact information: Department of Cell Biology, Johns Hopkins Medical 
Institute, 725 N. Wolfe St., Baltimore, MD 21205, Ph: 410-502-2850
Email: Douglas.Robinson@jhu.edu

J. Biol. Chem., In press

   Dynacortin is a novel protein that was discovered in a genetic suppressor 
screen of a Dictyostelium discoideum cytokinesis-deficient mutant cell line 
devoid of the cleavage furrow actin-bundling protein, cortexillin I.  While 
dynacortin is highly enriched in the cortex, particularly in cell-surface 
protrusions, it is excluded from the cleavage furrow cortex during 
cytokinesis.  Here, we describe the biochemical characterization of this new 
protein.  Purified dynacortin is an 80-kDa dimer with a large 5.7 nm Stoke s 
radius.  Dynacortin cross-links actin filaments into parallel arrays with a 
mole ratio of one dimer to 1.3 actin monomers and a 3.1 mM Kd. Using total 
internal reflection fluorescence microscopy, GFP-dynacortin and the actin-
bundling protein coronin-GFP are seen to concentrate in highly dynamic 
cortical structures with assembly and disassembly half-lives of about 15 
seconds.  These results indicate that cells have evolved different actin-
filament cross-linking proteins with complementary cellular distributions 
that collaborate to orchestrate complex cell shape changes.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Morphology and dynamics of the endocytic pathway in Dictyostelium discoideum

Eva M. Neuhaus, Wolfhard Almers and Thierry Soldati

Mol. Biol. Cell, in press

   Dictyostelium discoideum is a genetically and biochemically tractable 
social amoeba belonging to the crown group of eukaryotes. It performs some 
of the tasks characteristic of a leukocyte such as chemotactic motility, 
macropinocytosis and phagocytosis that are not performed by other model 
organisms or are difficult to study. D. discoideum is becoming a popular 
system to study molecular mechanisms of endocytosis, but the morphological 
characterization of the organelles along this pathway and the comparison 
with equivalent and/or different organelles in animal cells and yeasts were 
lagging. Here, we used a combination of evanescent wave microscopy and 
electron microscopy of rapidly frozen samples to visualize primary endocytic 
vesicles, vesicular-tubular structures of the early and late endo-lysosomal 
system, such as multi-vesicular bodies, and the specialized secretory 
lysosomes. In addition, we present biochemical and morphological evidence 
for the existence of a micropinocytic pathway, which contributes to the 
uptake of membrane alongside macropinocytosis, which is the major fluid 
phase uptake process. This complex endosomal compartment underwent 
continuous cycles of tubulation/vesiculation as well as homo- and 
heterotypic fusions, in a way very reminiscent of mechanisms and structures 
documented in leukocytes. Finally, egestion of fluid phase from the 
secretory lysosomes was directly observed.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The dynamin A ring complex: molecular organisation and nucleotide-dependent 
conformational changes

Boris Klockow, Willem Tichelaar*, Dean R. Madden*, Hartmut H. Niemann, 
Toshihiko Akiba, Keiko Hirose$, Dietmar J. Manstein


Department of Biophysics and *Ion Channel Structure Research Group, 
Max-Planck-Institute for Medical Research, Jahnstr. 29, D-69120 Heidelberg, 
Germany  National Institute for Advanced Interdisciplinary Research and 
$ Gene Discovery Research Center, National Institute of Advanced Industrial 
Science and Technology (AIST), 1-1-4 Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8562, Japan

The EMBO Journal, in press.

The GTPase dynamin A of the lower eukaryote Dictyostelium discoideum 
functions in multiple membrane severing events. Here we show by electron 
microscopy that dynamin A self-assembles into rings and helices similar to 
human dynamin 1. Single particle analysis of the rings led to a three-
dimensional map of the nucleotide-free dynamin A ring complex. The complex 
consists of two layers, each layer comprising two concentric rings with 11-
fold symmetry. The inner ring forms spike-like structures towards the centre, 
ideally situated to penetrate into a tubulated lipid membrane. The GTP-bound 
state, visualised using the non-hydrolysable GTP analogue GppNHp, is 
associated with reorganisation of the ring complex leading to the generation 
of short helical assemblies. Subsequent steps in the hydrolytic cycle induce 
further conformational changes  including an increase in helical pitch  and 
culminate in the disassembly of the complex. The results support a model for 
the mechanochemical action of dynamin family proteins that involves both 
constriction and stretching in membrane fission.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 18, number 2]
