Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 18, number 8
May 18, 2002

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at DictyBase--http://dictybase.org.

=============
  Abstracts
=============

The Cdk5 homologue, Crp, regulates endocytosis and secretion in 
Dictyostelium and is necessary for optimum growth and differentiation

Shiv K. Sharma1, Debra A. Brock2, Robin R. Ammann2 , Tiffany DeShazo3, 
Meenal Khosla1, Richard H. Gomer2,3 and Gerald Weeks1


1Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of British
 Columbia, Vancouver, BC  V6T 1Z3  Canada

2Howard Hughes Medical Institute and

3Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology,
MS-140, Rice University,
6100 S. Main Street,
Houston, TX 77005-1892


Developmental Biology, in press

Summary

        Dictyostelium Crp is a member of the cyclin dependant kinase (Cdk) 
family of proteins.  It is most related in sequence to mammalian Cdk5, which 
unlike other members of the family, has functions that are unrelated to the 
cell cycle.  In order to better understand the function of Crp in 
Dictyostelium, we overexpressed a dominant negative form, Crp-D144N, under 
the control of the actin 15 promoter.  Cells overexpressing Crp-D144N 
exhibit a reduced growth rate in suspension culture and reduced rates of 
fluid-phase endocytosis and phagocytosis.  There is no reduction in Cdc2 
kinase activity in extracts from cells overexpressing Crp-D144N, suggesting 
that the growth defect is not due to inhibition of Cdc2.  In addition to 
the growth defect, the act15::crp-D144N transformants aggregate at a slower 
rate than wild-type cells and form large aggregation streams.  These 
eventually break up to form small aggregates and most of these do not 
produce mature fruiting bodies.  The aggregation defect is fully reversed 
in the presence of wild-type cells but terminal differentiation is only 
partially rescued.  In act15::crp-D144N transformants, the countin component 
of the counting factor, a secreted protein complex that regulates the 
breakup of streams, mostly appears outside the cell as degradation products 
and the reduced level of the intact protein may at least partially account 
for the initial formation of the large aggregation streams.  Our 
observations indicate that Crp is important for both endocytosis and efflux 
and that defects in these functions lead to reduced growth and aberrant 
development.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Clarke, M., Koehler, J., Arana, Q., Liu, T., Heuser, J., and Gerisch, G. 

Dynamics of the vacuolar H+-ATPase in the contractile vacuole complex and the 
endosomal pathway of Dictyostelium cells.  

J. Cell Sci., in press.

ABSTRACT

The vacuolar H+-ATPase (V-ATPase) is a multi-subunit enzyme that plays 
important roles in eukaryotic cells.  In Dictyostelium, it is found 
primarily in membranes of the contractile vacuole complex, where it 
energizes fluid accumulation by this osmoregulatory organelle, and also in 
membranes of endo-lysosomes, where it serves to acidify the endosomal lumen. 
In the present study, a fusion was created between vatM, the gene encoding 
the 100-kDa transmembrane subunit of the V-ATPase, and the gene encoding 
Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP).  When expressed in Dictyostelium cells, 
this fusion protein VatM-GFP was correctly targeted to contractile vacuole 
and endo-lysosomal membranes, and was competent to direct assembly of the 
V-ATPase enzyme complex.  Protease treatment of isolated endosomes indicated 
that the GFP moiety, located on the C-terminus of VatM, was exposed to the 
cytoplasmic side of the endosomal membrane rather than to the lumenal side. 
VatM-GFP labeling of the contractile vacuole complex revealed clearly the 
dynamics of this pleiomorphic vesiculo-tubular organelle.  VatM-GFP labeling 
of endosomes allowed direct visualization of the trafficking of vacuolar 
proton pumps in this pathway, which appeared to be entirely independent 
from the contractile vacuole membrane system.  In cells whose endosomes 
were pre-labeled with TRITC-dextran and then fed yeast particles, VatM-GFP 
was delivered to newly formed yeast phagosomes with the same time course as 
TRITC-dextran, consistent with transfer via a direct fusion of endosomes 
with phagosomes.  Several minutes were required before the intensity of the 
VatM-GFP labeling of new phagosomes reached the level observed in older 
phagosomes, suggesting that this fusion process was progressive and 
continuous.  VatM-GFP was retrieved from the phagosome membrane prior to 
exocytosis of the indigestible remnants of the yeast particle.  These data 
suggest that vacuolar proton pumps are recycled by fusion of advanced with 
newly-formed endosomes.  

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A Talin Fragment as an Actin Trap Visualizing Actin Flow in Chemotaxis, 
Endocytosis, and Cytokinesis
 
Igor Weber, Jens Niewoehner, Aiping Du, Ursula Roehrig, and Guenther Gerisch
 
Max-Planck-Institut fuer Biochemie, Martinsried, Germany 
  
Cell Motility and the Cytoskeleton, in press.
 
ABSTRACT
 
A C-terminal 63 kDa fragment of talin A from Dictyostelium discoideum forms 
a slowly dissociating complex with F-actin in vitro. This talin fragment 
(TalC63) has been tagged with GFP and used as a trap for actin filaments 
in chemotactic cell movement, endocytosis, and mitotic cell division. 
TalC63 efficiently sequesters actin filaments in vivo. Its translocation 
reflects the direction and efficiency of an actin flow.  Along the body 
of a migrating Dictyostelium cell, this flow is directed from the front 
to the tail.  If during chemotaxis one or two new fronts are induced, the 
flow is always directed away from these fronts.  The flow thus reflects 
the re-programming of cell polarity in response to changing gradients of 
chemoattractant. In endocytosis, the fluorescent complexes are translocated 
to the base of a phagocytic or macropinocytic cup. During mitosis, the 
complexes of F-actin with TalC63 accumulate within the midzone of anaphase 
cells. If TalC63 is strongly expressed, the entire cleavage furrow is filled 
out by sequestered actin filaments, and cytokinesis is severely impaired. 
These cells are considered to mimic the phenotype of mutants deficient in 
the shredding of actin filaments that normally occurs in the mid-zone of a 
dividing cell.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
Tubular-Vesicular Transformation in the Contractile Vacuole System of 
Dictyostelium. (Review)
 
Guenther Gerisch*, John Heuser#, and Margaret Clarke+ 
 
*  Max-Planck-Institut fuer Biochemie, Martinsried, Germany 
# Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University 
   School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA
+  Program in Molecular and Cell Biology, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, 
    Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA
  
Cell Biology International, in press.
  
ABSTRACT

The contractile vacuole complex of Dictyostelium is the paradigm of a membrane 
system that undergoes tubular-vesicular transitions during its regular cycle 
of activities.  This system acts as an osmoregulatory organelle in freshwater 
amoebae and protozoa.  It collects fluid in a network of tubules and cisternae, 
and pumps it out of the cell through transient pores in the plasma membrane.  
Tubules and vacuoles are interconvertible.  The tubular channels are associated 
with the cortical actin network and are capable of moving and fusing.  The 
contractile vacuole complex is separate from vesicles of the endosomal pathway 
and preserves its identity in a dispersed state during cell division.  We 
outline techniques to visualize the contractile vacuole system by electron 
and light microscopy.  Emphasis is placed on GFP-fusion proteins that allow 
visualization of the dynamics of the contractile vacuole network in living 
cells.  Proteins that control activities of this specialized organelle in 
Dictyostelium have been conserved during evolution and also regulate 
membrane trafficking in man.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 18, number 8]

 
