Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 12, number 13
June 26, 1999

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

===================================
  Postdoctoral Position Available
===================================

A postdoctoral associate position is available beginning August 1 in 
the Singleton lab.  The project centers around a recently identified 
phosphorelay signaling system that controls cAMP dependent protein 
Kinase A activity.  DHKC is a sensor histidine kinase that we propose 
transfers phosphates down the phosphorelay in response to endogenous 
ammonia production.  The result is a decrease in the intracellular 
cAMP concentration brought about by an activation of the cAMP 
phosphodiesterase activity of the postulated downstream response 
regulator REGA.  The resulting alteration of PKA activity is hypothesized 
to contribute to the maintenance of appropriate timing of aggregation 
through finger formation and to making the appropriate choice between 
slug formation versus culmination.  DHKC signaling, stimulated by ammonia, 
is also postulated to be required for activating the spore germination 
pathway.   Another sensor kinase, DHKB, is proposed to act as a phosphatase 
within spores to inhibit the transfer of phosphates to REGA.  In doing so 
in response to discadenine, an autoinhibitor of germination, DHKB signaling 
prevents premature activation of the germination pathway.

More information about the project, including an abstact and specific 
aims, about the background leading up to the project, and about other 
activities in the lab can be obtained at the following web site: 
http://www.biocourses.cas.vanderbilt.edu/singleton/singletonlab/index.html.
If you are interested in this position, please send via email your CV 
(charles.k.singleton@vanderbilt.edu). 

=============
  Abstracts
=============

[Editor's note:  the following abstract appeared in the last issue with
errors:  Betas had been inappropriately replaced by alphas.  The correct
abstract appears in its entirety below.]

A Serpentine Receptor-dependent, Gbeta- and Ca2+ Influx-independent 
Pathway Regulates Mitogen-activated Protein Kinase ERK2 in Dictyostelium

Paul W. Schenk, Thomas Nebl, Paul R. Fisher and B. Ewa Snaar-Jagalska

Section of Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Plant Sciences, Leiden 
University, P.O. Box 9505, 2300 RA  Leiden, The Netherlands and
School of Microbiology, La Trobe University, Bundoora, VIC 3083, Australia

Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., in press

Abstract

Ca2+ influx and mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase activation are 
important phenomena in signal transduction, which are often interconnected. 
We investigated whether serpentine receptor-dependent, G beta-independent 
activation of MAP kinase ERK2 by chemoattractant cyclic AMP (cAMP) is 
mediated by Ca2+ influx in the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum. 
We generated a D. discoideum double mutant, which harbours a temperature-
sensitive G beta subunit and expresses the apoaequorin protein. Utilizing 
this mutant, we demonstrate that cAMP induced Ca2+ influx into intact D. 
discoideum cells can be blocked completely at both the permissive and the 
restrictive temperature, by using either gadolinium ions or Ruthenium Red. 
Under the same experimental conditions, these substances do not abolish cAMP 
stimulation of ERK2 at either temperature. We conclude that there is a G beta- 
and Ca2+ influx-independent pathway for the receptor-dependent activation of 
MAP kinase ERK2 in Dictyostelium discoideum.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Co-loss of Profilin I, II and Cofilin with Actin from Maturing Phagosomes
in Dictyostelium discoideum

Aidong Yuan and Catherine P. Chia

School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln,
Neraska 68588-0118, USA

Protoplasma, in press

ABSTRACT:

   Although it is known that actin polymerizes rapidly at the plasma 
membrane during the ingestion phase of phagocytosis, not yet fully understood 
are the mechanisms by which actin is recruited to form a phagocytic cup and 
then subsequently dissociated from the phagosome.  The aim of this study 
was to identify actin-binding proteins that mediated actin filament dynamics 
during phagosome formation and processing.  We report that profilins I and II, 
which promote filament assembly, and cofilin, which stimulates filament 
disassembly, were constituents of phagosomes isolated from Dictyostelium 
discoideum fed latex beads, and associated with actin.  Biochemical analyses 
detected one isoform only of cofilin, which bound actin in unstimulated cells 
as well as in cells engaged in phagocytosis, subjected to various stress 
treatments, and through development.  At membranes of young phagosomes, 
profilins I and II co-localized with monomeric actin labeled with fluorescent 
DNase, and cofilin co-localized with filamentous actin labeled with rhodamine 
phalloidin.  Both immunocytochemical and quantitative immunoblotting data 
indicated that the kinetic loss of profilins I, II and cofilin of maturing 
phagosomes closely followed the falling levels of actin associated with the 
vesicles.  As evidence of vesicle processing, D. discoideum crystal protein 
(an esterase) was recruited rapidly to phagosomes and its levels increased 
while those of actin, profilins I, II and cofilin jointly decreased.  The 
localization data and concurrent losses of profilins and cofilin with actin 
from phagosomes are consistent with the roles of these actin-binding proteins 
in filament dynamics, and indicated that they were involved in regulating 
the assembly and disassembly of the actin coat of phagosomes.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Three actin cross-linking proteins, the 34 kDa actin-bundling protein, 
a-actinin, and ABP-120, have both unique and redundant roles 
in the growth and development of Dictyostelium 

Francisco Rivero(1), Ruth Furukawa(2), Marcus Fechheimer(2) and Angelika A.
Noegel(1)

1 Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany
2 Department of Cellular Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia 30602

Journal of Cell Science, in press.

Abstract

   The contribution of three actin cross-linking proteins, a-actinin (aA), 
ABP-120, and the 34 kDa actin-bundling protein to cellular functions has 
been studied in three single mutant (aA-, 120-, and 34-) and three double 
mutant (aA-/120-, 34-/aA-, 34-/120-) strains of Dictyostelium generated 
by homologous recombination. Strains aA-/120- and 34-/aA- exhibited a 
reduced rate of pinocytosis, grew to lower saturation densities, and 
produced small cells in shaking cultures. All strains grew normally in 
bacterial suspensions and on agar plates with a bacterial lawn. Slow 
growth under conditions of reduced temperature and increased osmolarity 
was observed in single mutants 34- and aA-, respectively, as well as in 
some of the double mutant strains. Motility, chemotaxis, and development 
were largely unaltered in 34-/aA- and 34-/120- cells. However, 34-/aA- 
cells showed enhanced aggregation when starved in suspension. Moreover, 
morphogenesis was impaired in both double mutant strains and fruiting 
bodies of aberrant morphology were observed. These defects were reverted 
by re-expression of one of the lacking cross-linking proteins. The additive 
and synthetic phenotypes of these mutations indicate that actin cross-linking 
proteins serve both unique and overlapping functions in the actin cytoskeleton. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Dictyostelium genome project: an invitation to species hopping

Robert R. Kay1 & Jeffrey G. Williams2

1 MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road, Cambridge, UK  CB2 2QH.

2 Wellcome Trust Building, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK DD1 5EH.

TIGS, in press

Summary

   Dictyostelium allows a number of general problems of eukaryotic biology 
to be addressed using molecular genetic tools more normally associated with 
yeast. The genome project, now underway, marks an important increase in the 
attractiveness of Dictyostelium as an experimental organism and will invite 
increased ‘species hopping’ by experimenters. We provide a brief guide to 
the problems that are being addressed in Dictyostelium, to the genome 
project itself and to the molecular genetic tools available for its 
exploitation.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Regulation of the ribonucleotide reductase small subunit gene by DNA-
damaging agents in Dictyostelium discoideum

GAUDET, P. (1,3) and TSANG, A. (1,2,3)

(1) Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, (2) Department of Biology, 
and (3)	Centre for Structural and Functional Genomics, Concordia University, 
1455 de Maisonneuve Blvd. W., Montreal, Quebec, H3G 1M8, Canada

Nucleic Acids Research, in press

ABSTRACT

   In E. coli, yeast, and mammalian cells, the genes encoding ribonucleotide 
reductase, an essential enzyme for de novo DNA synthesis, are up-regulated 
in response to DNA damaging agents. We have examined the response of the 
rnrB gene, encoding the small subunit of ribonucleotide reductase in 
Dictyostelium discoideum, to DNA damaging agents. We show here that the 
accumulation of rnrB transcript is increased in response to methyl methane 
sulfonate, 4-nitroquinoline-1-oxide and irradiation with UV-light, but not 
to the ribonucleotide reductase inhibitor hydroxyurea. This response is 
rapid, transient, and independent of protein synthesis. Moreover, cells 
from different developmental stages are able to respond to the drug in a 
similar fashion, regardless of the basal level of expression of the rnrB 
gene. We have defined the cis-acting elements of the rnrB promoter required 
for the response to methyl methane sulfonate and 4-nitroquinoline-1-oxide 
by deletion analysis. Our results indicate that there is one element, named 
box C, that can confer response to both drugs. Two other boxes, box A and 
box D, specifically conferred response to methyl methane sulfonate and 
4-nitroquinoline-1-oxide, respectively.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hyperosmotic Stress-induced Reorganization of Actin Bundles in 
Dictyostelium Cells Overexpressing Cofilin.  

Hiroyuki Aizawa1, Maiko Katadae1,$, Mikako Maruya1, Masazumi 
Sameshima1, Kimiko Murakami-Murofushi$, and Ichiro Yahara1,*.  

1Department of Cell Biology, The Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of 
Medical Science, Honkomagome 3-18-22, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113, Japan, 
and $Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Ochanomizu University, 
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 112, Japan.  

Genes to Cells, in press

Abstract

Background:  Cofilin is a low-molecular weight actin-modulating protein, 
which binds to, severs, and depolymerizes actin filaments in vitro.  
Aip1, an actin-interacting protein, was recently identified as a 
product of a gene on a multicopy plasmid which suppresses the 
temperature-sensitive phenotype of a cofilin mutant in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae.  Actin cytoskeleton plays an essential role in resistance 
to hyperosmotic stress in Dictyostelium discoideum.  Roles of cofilin 
and Aip1 in the resistance are not known.  

Results:  In response to hyperosmotic stress, D. discoideum cells 
round up.  This stress-induced morphological change involves 
redistribution of cofilin together with actin filaments into 
cortical contractile portions of the cells, followed by their 
contraction. Overexpression of cofilin increases and thickens 
cortical actin bundles in cells. The bundles became tight and 
reorganized into a ring-shaped structure in response to hyperosmotic 
stress.  The ring structure of actin bundles had two characteristic 
bands across them; bright and dark bands which were heavily stained 
and were not stained with phalloidin. In the bundles, straight 
filaments with a diameter of 5.3-nm were aligned parallel by 
cross-bridge structures.  In cells lacking myosin-II heavy chain, 
the bundles, which were induced by overexpression of cofilin, 
shortened and became straight upon hyperosmotic stress, forming 
a polygonal structure.  D. discoideum Aip1/Wrp2 enhanced severing 
actin filaments by cofilin in vitro and colocalized with cofilin 
in cells including those overexpressing cofilin before and after 
exposure to hyperosmotic stress.  Conclusions:  Cofilin plays a 
pivotal role together with Aip1/Wrp2 in reorganization of actin 
architectures into bundles that contract in a myosin-II-independent 
manner, in response to hyperosmotic stress.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 12, number 13]

  