Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 12, number 11
May 22, 1999

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

=============
  Abstracts
=============

HIGH cAMP IN SPORES OF DICTYOSTELIUM DISCOIDEUM: ASSOCIATION
WITH SPORE DORMANCY AND INHIBITION OF GERMINATION

Kiran J. Virdy1, Todd W. Sands1, Susan H. Kopko1, Saskia van Es2,
Marcel Meima2, Pauline Schaap2 and David A. Cotter1*

1Department of Biological Sciences, University of Windsor, 401
Sunset Avenue, Windsor, Ontario, Canada, N9B 3P4, and 2Institute
of Molecular Plant Sciences, Cell Biology Section, Clusius Laboratory,
Wassenaarseweg 64, 2333 AL Leiden, Netherlands.

Microbiology (in press)

SUMMARY

   Signalling mechanisms involving cAMP have a well documented role in the
coordination of multicellular development and differentiation leading to
spore formation in the social amoeba, Dictyostelium discoideum. We have 
examined cAMP's involvement in the poorly understood developmental 
stages of spore dormancy and germination.  Dormant spores contained up 
to 11-fold more cAMP than nascent amoebae.  These Spore cAMP levels were 
not constant, but typically under went a surge at 14-18 d when spores 
acquired the ability to germinate spontaneously.  The high cAMP levels 
decreased only during successful spore germination, i.e., emergence of 
nascent amoebae.  The temporal pattern of  cAMP decrease was
complex and unique to the method of spore activation, supporting our
hypothesis that exogenously (e.g. heat) activated and autoactivated 
spores germinate by different mechanisms.  During heat-induced 
activation, transcription of acg (a gene encoding adenylyl cyclase 
associated with germination) correlated well with spore cAMP content.  
Young wild-type spores, incapable of spontaneous germination, maintained 
a uniformly high cAMP level, and spore cAMP levels also remained high 
if germination was inhibited. When activated spores were deactivated by 
applying  increased osmotic pressure, cAMP concentrations rose and 
ultimately levelled off at the high levels typical of dormant spores.
The correlation between high cAMP  and failure to germinate was evident 
as well when autoactivation was inhibited by the cAMP analogue, 8-bromo-
cAMP.  Also, spores from a strain (HTY217) with unrestrained protein 
kinase A  activity were incapable of spontaneous germination.  Overall, 
our experiments provide evidence for continued cAMP signalling
in spores up to 18 d after sporulation, and for linkages between elevated 
cAMP spore deactivation and inhibition of spontaneous germination.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ammonium Phosphate in Sori of Dictyostelium discoideum Promotes Spore Dormancy
Through Stimulation of the Osmosensor ACG

David A. Cotter1, Andrew J. Dunbar2, Stanley D. Buconjic1, and John F.
Wheldrake2

'Department of Biological Sciences, University of Windsor, 401 Sunset Avenue,
Windsor, Ontario, Canada, N9B 3P4, and 2School of Biological Sciences, The
Flinders University of South, Australia, Bedford Park, GPO Box 2100, Adelaide
5001, Australia

Microbiology (in press)

ABSTRACT

The  sori  of Dictyostelium discoideum (strains SG1, SG2, NC4 and V12) contained
greater  than  100  mM ammonium phosphate. Glutamine synthetase (GS) which could
remove  ammonia from the sorus, was not present in 2 day old dormant spores but
enzyme activity returned to vegetative levels after spore germination.  Based on
mRNA blotting, the  activity of this enzyme in germinating spores appeared to be
transcriptionally   controlled.   At  the  same  time  that  (GS)  activity was
increasing,  ammonia  was  released from germinating spores.  Exogenous ammonium
ions  at  a  concentration  of  28  mM did not block germination nor modulate GS
activity  in  nascent  amoebae.   It  was  concluded  that the transcription and
translation  of  GS  is not environmentally regulated but is an integral part of
the germination process preparing nascent amoebae for vegetative growth. 
An  exogenous  concentration of 69 mM ammonium phosphate could maintain dormancy
in spores of strains SG1 and SG2 for at least a week in the absence of any other
inhibitory  component  from the sori.  The inhibition was reversible at any time
by either dilution or by washing the spores free of the ammonium ion.  Spores of
strain acg- were not inhibited by 100 mM ammonium phosphate.  

A  model is presented in which GS in prespore cells serves as a sink for ammonia
to allow the osmotically sensitive adenylyl cyclase aggregation protein (ACA) to 
activate  protein  kinase  A  (PKA)  to  induce  fruiting body formation.  After 
fruiting  body  formation  is  complete, the decline in GS and ACA activities in 
developing  spores  is  offset  by  their  replacement  with the osmotically and 
ammonia-stimulated  adenylyl  cyclase osmosensor for germination (ACG).  Ammonia 
and  discadenine  may act as separate signals to synergistically activate PKA by 
stimulating  ACG activity while inhibiting cyclic AMP phosphodiestrase activity 
in fully dormant spores.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Starvation promotes Dictyostelium development by relieving PufA inhibition of PKA 
translation through the YakA kinase pathway.

Glaucia Mendes Souza Aline Maria da Silva and Adam Kuspa

Dept. Bioquímica, Instituto de Química, Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil
05508-900, Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry, Baylor College
of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA, 77030

Development, in press

SUMMARY

   When nutrients are depleted, Dictyostelium cells undergo cell cycle arrest 
and initiate a developmental program that ensures survival.  The YakA protein 
kinase governs this transition by regulating the cell cycle, repressing growth-
phase genes and inducing developmental genes.  YakA mutants have a shortened 
cell cycle and do not initiate development.  A suppressor of yakA that reverses 
most of the developmental defects of yakA-cells, but none of their growth defects 
was identified.  The inactivated gene, pufA, encodes a member of the Puf protein 
family of translational regulators.  Upon starvation, pufA-cells develop precociously 
and overexpress developmentally important proteins, including the catalytic subunit 
of cAMP-dependent protein kinase, PKA-C.  Gel mobility-shift assays using a 200-base 
segment of PKA-C’s mRNA as a probe reveals a complex with wild-type cell extracts, 
but not with pufA-cell extracts, suggesting the presence of a potential PufA 
recognition element in the PKA-C mRNA.  PKA-C protein levels are low at the times 
of development when this complex is detectable, whereas when the complex is 
undetectable PKA-C levels are high.  There is also an inverse relationship between 
PufA and PKA-C protein levels at all times of development in every mutant tested.  
Furthermore, expression of the putative PufA recognition elements in wild-type cells 
causes precocious aggregation and PKA-C overexpression, phenocopying a pufA mutation.  
Finally, YakA function is required for the decline of PufA protein and mRNA levels 
in the first 4 hours of development.  We propose that PufA is a translational regulator 
that directly controls PKA-C synthesis and that YakA regulates the initiation of 
development by inhibiting the expression of PufA.  Our work also suggests that Puf 
protein translational regulation evolved prior to the radiation of metazoan species.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Role of myosin II tail sequences in its function and localization at the
cleavage furrow in Dictyostelium

Shu Shi1, Randall J. Lee2, Janine M. LeBlanc-Straceski3 and Taro Q. P. Uyeda1

1Biomolecular Research Group, National Institute for Advanced
Interdisciplinary Research, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8562, Japan; 2Department
of Medicine and Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California
at San Francisco, CA 94143-4354, USA; 3Department of Biology, Merrimack
College, North Andover, MA 01845, USA

J. Cell Sci. (in press)

SUMMARY

Cytoplasmic myosin II accumulates in the cleavage furrow and provides the force 
for cytokinesis in animal and amoeboid cells.  One model proposes that a specific 
domain in the myosin II tail is responsible for its localization, possibly by 
interacting with a factor concentrated in the equatorial region.  To test this 
possibility, we have expressed myosins carrying mutations in the tail domain in 
a strain of Dictyostelium cells from which the endogenous myosin heavy chain gene 
has been deleted.  The mutations used in this study include four internal tail deletions:
My824-941, My943-1464, My943-1194 and My1156-1464.  Contrary to the prediction of 
the hypothesis, immunofluorescence staining demonstrated that all mutant myosins were 
able to move toward the furrow region.  Chimeric myosins, which consisted of a 
Dictyostelium  myosin head and chicken skeletal myosin tail, also efficiently localized 
to the cleavage furrow.  All these deletion and chimeric mutant myosins, except for 
My943-1464, the largest deletion mutant, were able to support cytokinesis in suspension.  
Our data suggests that there is no single specific domain in the tail of Dictyostelium 
myosin II that is required for its functioning at and localization to the cleavage furrow.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Scanning the available Dictyostelium discoideum proteome for O-linked GlcNAc glycosylation 
sites using neural networks.

Ramneek Gupta (1), Eva Jung (2), Andrew A Gooley (2), Keith L Williams (2), Soren Brunak 
(1) and Jan E Hansen (1).

1 Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, Dept of Biotechnology Technical University of 
Denmark, Bldg 208, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark; 2 School of Biological Sciences, Macquerie 
University, Sydney, 2109 NSW, Australia.

Glycobiology, in press.

Abstract:

Dictyostelium discoideum has been suggested as a eukaryotic model organism for 
glycobiology studies. Presently, the characteristics of acceptor sites for the N-
acetylglucosaminyl-transferases in Dictyostelium discoideum, which link GlcNAc in an 
alpha linkage to hydroxyl residues, are largely unknown. This motivates the development 
of a species specific method for prediction of O-linked GlcNAc  glycosylation sites in 
secreted and membrane proteins of D. discoideum. The method presented here employs a 
jury of artificial neural networks. These networks  were trained to recognise the 
sequence context and protein surface accessibility in 39 experimentally determined 
O-(alpha)-GlcNAc sites found in D. discoideum glycoproteins expressed in vivo. Cross-
validation of the data revealed a correlation in which 97% of the glycosylated and 
non-glycosylated sites were correctly  identified. Based on the currently limited 
data set, an abundant periodicity of two (positions -3, -1, +1, +3, etc.) in Proline 
residues alternating with hydroxyl amino acids was observed upstream and downstream 
of the acceptor site. This was a consequence of the spacing of the glycosylated 
residues themselves which were peculiarly found to be situated only at even positions 
with respect to each other, indicating that these may be located within beta-strands.  
The method has been used for a rapid and ranked scan of the fraction of the Dictyostelium 
proteome available in public databases, remarkably 25-30% of which were predicted 
glycosylated. The scan revealed acceptor sites in several proteins known experimentally 
to be O-glycosylated at unmapped sites. The available proteome was classified into 
functional and cellular compartments to study any preferential patterns of glycosylation. 
A sequence based prediction server for GlcNAc O-glycosylations in D. discoideum proteins 
has been made available through the WWW at http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/DictyOGlyc/ 
and via E-mail to DictyOGlyc@cbs.dtu.dk.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Myosin I Contributes to the Generation of Resting Cortical Tension.

Jianwu Dai*#, H. Ping Ting-BeallÝ, Robert M. HochmuthÝ, Micheal P.
Sheetz*, and Margaret A. Titus*@

*Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center
Durham, NC 27710; ÝDepartment of Mechanical Engineering and Materials
Sciences, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708

@ author for all correspondence at present address: Department of Genetics,
Cell Biology, and Development, University of Minnesota, 4-102 Owre Hall
321 Church St. S.E., Minneapolis, MN 55455

BIOPHYSICAL JOURNAL, in press

ABSTRACT

The amoeboid myosin Is are required for cellular cortical functions such as 
pseudopod formation and macropinocytosis, as demonstrated by the finding that 
Dictyostelium cells lacking one or more of these actin-based motors are defective 
in these processes. Alterations in these processes are concomitant with changes in 
the actin-filled cortex of various Dictyostelium myosin I mutants. Given that the 
amoeboid myosin Is possess both actin and membrane binding domains, the mutant 
phenotypes could be due to alterations in the generation and/or regulation of cell 
cortical tension. This has been directly tested by analyzing mutant Dictyostelium 
that either lack or overexpress various myosin Is using micropipette aspiration 
techniques. Dictyostelium cells lacking only one myosin I have normal levels of 
cortical tension. However, myosin I double mutants have significantly reduced (50%) 
cortical tension, and those that mildly overexpress an amoeboid myosin I exhibit 
increased cortical tension. Treatment of either type of mutant with the lectin 
concanavalin A (ConA) that cross-links surface receptors, results in significant 
increases in cortical tension, suggesting that the contractile activity of these 
myosin Is is not controlled by this stimulus. These results demonstrate that myosin 
Is work co-operatively to contribute substantially to the generation of resting 
cortical tension that is required for efficient cell migration and macropinocytosis.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Evidence that the Dictyostelium Dd-STATa protein is a repressor that
regulates commitment to stalk cell differentiation and is also required for
efficient chemotaxis

Sudhasri Mohanty*, Keith A. Jermyn*, Anne Early, Takefumi Kawata, Laurence
Aubry, Adriano Ceccarelli, Pauline Schaap, Jeffrey G. Williams and Richard
A. Firtel

DEVELOPMENT, in press

SUMMARY

Dd-STATa is a structural and functional homologue of the metazoan STAT 
(Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription) proteins.  We show that Dd-STATa 
null cells exhibit several distinct developmental phenotypes.  The aggregation of Dd-STATa 
null cells is delayed and they chemotax slowly to a cAMP source, suggesting a role for 
Dd-STATa in these early processes.  In Dd-STATa null strains, slug-like structures are 
formed but they have an aberrant pattern of gene expression. In such slugs, ecmB/lacZ, 
a marker that is normally specific for cells on the stalk cell differentiation pathway, 
is expressed throughout the prestalk region. Stalk cell differentiation in Dictyostelium 
has been proposed to be under negative control, mediated by repressor elements present 
in the promoters of stalk cell-specific genes.  Dd-STATa  binds these repressor elements 
in vitro and the ectopic expression of ecmB/lacZ  in the null strain provides in vivo 
evidence that Dd-STATa is the repressor protein that regulates commitment to stalk cell 
differentiation.  Dd-STATa null cells display aberrant behavior in a monolayer assay 
wherein stalk cell differentiation is induced using the stalk cell morphogen DIF. The 
ecmB gene, a general marker for stalk cell differentiation, is greatly over-induced by 
DIF in Dd-STATa null cells.  Also, Dd-STATa null cells are hyper-sensitive to DIF for 
expression of ST/lacZ, a marker for the earliest stages in the differentiation of one 
of the stalk cell sub-types.  We suggest that both these manifestations of DIF hyper-
sensitivity in the null strain result from the balance between activation and repression 
of the promoter elements being tipped in favor of activation when the repressor is absent.
Paradoxically, although Dd-STATa null cells are hypersensitive to the inducing effects of 
DIF and readily form stalk cells in monolayer assay, the Dd-STATa null cells show little 
or no terminal stalk cell differentiation within the slug.  Dd-STATa null slugs remain 
developmentally arrested for several days before forming very small spore masses supported 
by a column of apparently undifferentiated cells.  Thus, complete stalk cell differentiation 
appears to require at least two events: a commitment step whereby the repression exerted by 
Dd-STATa is lifted and a second step that is blocked in a Dd-STATa null organism.  This 
latter step may involve extracellular cAMP, a known repressor of stalk cell differentiation, 
because Dd-STATa null cells are abnormally sensitive to the inhibitory effects of 
extracellular cAMP.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

FINGERPRINTING OF ADENYLYL CYCLASE ACTIVITIES DURING DICTYOSTELIUM DEVELOPMENT INDICATES 
A DOMINANT ROLE FOR ADENYLYL CYCLASE B IN TERMINAL DIFFERENTIATION

Marcel E. Meima and Pauline Schaap

Cell Biology Section, Institute for Molecular Plant Sciences, University
of Leiden

Developmental Biology, in press

ABSTRACT

Activation of cAMP dependent protein kinase (PKA) triggers terminal differentiation in 
Dictyostelium, without an obvious requirement for the G-protein coupled adenylyl cyclase, 
ACA, or the osmosensory adenylyl cyclase ACG. A third adenylyl cyclase, ACB, was recently 
detected in rapidly developing mutants. The specific characteristics of ACA, ACG and ACB 
were used to determine their respective activities during development of wild-type cells. 
ACA was highly active during aggregation, with negligible activity in the slug stage.  
ACG activity was not present at significant levels until mature spores had formed. ACB 
activity increased strongly after slugs had formed with optimal activity at early fruiting 
body formation. The same high activity was observed in slugs of ACG null mutants and ACA 
null mutants that overexpress PKA (acaA/PKA), indicating that it was not due to either ACA or 
ACG. The detection of high adenylyl cyclase activity in acaA/PKA null mutants contradicts 
earlier conclusions (Wang, B. and Kuspa, A. 1997.  Science 277, 251-254) that these mutants 
can develop into fruiting bodies in the complete absence of cAMP. In contrast to slugs of 
null mutants for the intracellular cAMP-phosphodiesterase REGA, where both intact cells 
and lysates show ACB activity, wild-type slugs only show activity in lysates.  This indicates 
that cAMP accumulation by ACB in living cells is controlled by REGA. REGA inhibition and PKA 
overexpression both cause precocious terminal differentiation. The developmental regulation 
of ACB and its relationship to REGA suggest that ACB activates PKA and induces terminal 
differentiation.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[End Dicty News, volume 12, number 11]

