Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 12, number 3
January 23, 1999

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

==============
  Abstracts
==============

Mechanism of action of the Rep protein from the Dictyostelium Ddp2 plasmid
family

Iman M. Shammat and Dennis L. Welker

Biology Department, Utah State University, Logan Utah 84322-5305

Plasmid, in press.

Summary:

   The yeast two hybrid system was used to show that the Rep proteins from 
three members of the Dictyostelium discoideum Ddp2 plasmid family, Ddp2, 
Ddp5, and Ddp6, form homomultimers but not heteromultimers. The results 
with deletion mutations suggest that multiple regions of the Rep proteins 
are involved in the multimerization. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays 
with heterologously expressed and purified Ddp2 Rep protein showed that it 
is a DNA binding protein. The nucleosomal organization of Ddp2 and Ddp6 in 
their inverted repeat and promoter regions was investigated. Analysis of 
mutants derived from the Ddp6 plasmid revealed that its Rep protein is 
required for nucleosome positioning (i.e. phasing) to occur in the promoter 
region. On the other hand, nucleosome positioning in the inverted repeat 
regions of both plasmids is not dependent on Rep protein but on either a 
feature of the DNA sequence or the binding of cellular factors, perhaps 
the Dictyostelium origin recognition complex. Rep protein is likely 
involved in transcription regulation and control of DNA replication, 
specifically amplification of plasmid at low copy numbers. The formation 
of homomultimers may be required for their regulatory activity.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Actin-Associated Protein Coronin in Chemotaxis, Cytokinesis, and
Phagocytosis of Dictyostelium discoideum

Karmela Barisic, Maria Ecke, Christina Heizer, Markus Maniak, Monika
Westphal, Richard Albrecht, and Guenther Gerisch

Max-Planck-Institut fuer Biochemie, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany

http://www.biochem.mpg.de/gerisch/

Trends in Cell Biology, in press.

Background:

In the highly motile cells of Dictyostelium discoideum the actin 
system is rapidly re-organized in response to self-generated or 
extraneous signals.  In this eukaryotic microorganism the actin, 
together with associated proteins, serves multiple functions 
providing a basis for cell motility, endocytosis, and mitotic cell 
division. Coronin is one of the actin-binding proteins that are 
recruited from the cytoplasm within seconds to locally form 
membrane-associated complexes together with filamentous actin.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

Microtubule-Dependent Golgi Disassembly and Reconstitution 
During Mitosis in Dictyostelium discoideum

Natalie Schneider, Guenther Gerisch, and Jean-Marc Schwartz

Max-Planck-Institut fuer Biochemie, D-82152 Martinsried
http://www.biochem.mpg.de/gerisch/

Trends in Cell Biology, in press.

Background:

The Golgi apparatus vesiculates at the beginning of mitosis, and is 
afterwards reconstituted by assembly of the vesicles close to the 
centrosome. This is demonstrated here in Dictyostelium cells, which 
are distinguished from cells of higher eukaryotes by intranuclear 
mitosis. To visualize Golgi disassembly and re-organization simultaneously 
with microtubule dynamics, cells were transfected with both golvesin-GFP, 
which localizes to the Golgi apparatus, and GFP-alpha-tubulin, which 
visualizes the mitotic apparatus and positions of the centrosomes. At 
the end of mitosis the centrosomes are rapidly moved around within the 
cells by guiding microtubules anchored to the cell cortex.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

Cytokinesis in Uni- and Multinucleate Myosin II-null Cells of 
Dictyostelium discoideum

Ralph Neujahr, Jana Koehler, John Murphy, Jean-Marc Schwartz, Monika 
Westphal, and Guenther Gerisch 

Max-Planck-Institut fuer Biochemie, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany
http://www.biochem.mpg.de/gerisch/

Trends in Cell Biology, in press.

Background:

During mitotic cell division, the segregation of chromosomes along 
the spindle is coordinated in time and space with the formation of 
a cleavage furrow. In Dictyostelium, myosin II-null cells are capable 
of undergoing cytokinesis when they are attached to an adhesive 
substrate surface. The mitotic division of these myosin II-depleted 
cells uncovers basic mechanisms of cytokinesis that drive cleavage 
furrow formation in the absence of the conventional, filamentous 
myosin. To relate microtubule dynamics to changes in cell shape, 
confocal fluorescence images of GFP-alpha-tubulin colored in green 
are superimposed in the movies onto simultaneously recorded phase-
contrast images displayed in red.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Myosin II-Independent F-Actin Flow Contributes to Cell Locomotion in 
Dictyostelium

Yoshio Fukui*1, Toshiko Kitanishi-Yumura*2, and Shigehiko Yumura*2

*1) Cell and Molecular Biology, Northwestern University Medical School, 
Chicago, Illinois, *2) Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Yamaguchi 
University, Yamaguchi, Japan.

J. Cell Science, in press

Summary:

   While the treadmilling and retrograde flow of F-actin are believed to 
be responsible for the protrusion of leading edges, little is known about 
the mechanism that brings the posterior cell body forward.  To elucidate 
the mechanism for the global cell locomotion, we examined the organizational 
changes of filamentous (F-) actin in live Dictyostelium discoideum.  We 
labeled F-actin with a trace amount of fluorescent phalloidin and analyzed 
its dynamics in nearly two-dimensional cells by using a sensitive, high-
resolution charge-coupled device.  We optically resolved a cyclic mode of 
tightening and loosening of fibrous cortical F-actin and quantitated its 
flow by measuring temporal and spatial intensity changes.  The rate of 
F-actin flow was evaluated with respect to migration velocity and 
morphometric changes.  In migrating monopodial cells, the cortical 
F-actin encircling the posterior cell body gradually accumulated into 
the tail end at a speed of 0.35 ?m/min.  We show qualitatively and 
quantitatively that the F-actin flow is closely associated with cell 
migration.  Similarly, in dividing cells, the cortical F-actin accumulated 
into the cleavage furrow.  Although five times slower than the wild type, 
the F-actin also flows rearward in migrating mhcA- cells; demonstrating 
that myosin II (conventional myosin) is not absolutely required for the 
observed dynamics of F-actin.  Yet consistent with reported transportation 
of ConA-beads (Jay and Elson, Nature 356: 438-440, 1992), the direction 
of observed F-actin flow in Dictyostelium is conceptually opposite from 
a barbed-end binding to the plasma membrane.  This study suggests that 
the posterior end of the cell has a unique motif that tugs the cortical 
actin layer rearward by means of a mechanism independent from myosin II; 
and this mechanism may be also involved in the cleavage furrow formation.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

MOUND CELL MOVEMENT AND MORPHOGENESIS IN DICTYOSTELIUM

Kathryn A. Kellerman* and James G. McNally#

Department of Biology and the Institute for Biomedical Computing, 
Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63130

Developmental Biology, in press

Summary:

   To examine mechanisms of cell locomotion within a 3-dimensional (3-D) 
cell mass, we have undertaken a systematic 3-D analysis of individual cell 
movements in the Dictyostelium mound, the first 3-D structure to form during 
development of the fruiting body.  We used time-lapse deconvolution microscopy 
to examine two strains whose motion represents endpoints on the spectrum of 
motile behaviors that we have observed in mounds.  In AX-2 mounds, cell motion 
is slow and trajectories are a combination of random and radial, compared to 
KAX-3, where motion is five-fold faster and most trajectories are rotational.  
Although radial or rotational motion was correlated with the optical-density 
wave patterns present in each strain, we also found small but significant 
sub-populations of cells that moved differently from the majority, 
demonstrating that optical-density waves are at best insufficient to explain 
all motile behavior in mounds.  In examining morphogenesis in these strains, 
we noted that AX-2 mounds tended to culminate directly to a fruiting body, 
whereas KAX-3 mounds first formed a migratory slug.  By altering buffering 
conditions we could interchange these behaviors, and then found that mound-
cell motions also changed accordingly.  This demonstrates a correlation 
between mound cell motion and subsequent development, but it is not 
obligatory.  Chimeric mounds composed of only 10% KAX-3 cells and 90% AX-2 
cells exhibited rotational motion suggesting that a diffusible molecule 
induces rotation, but many of these mounds still culminated directly 
demonstrating that rotational motion does not always lead to slug migration.   
Our observations provide a detailed analysis of cell motion for two distinct 
modes of mound and slug formation in Dictyostelium.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A Mutation that separates the RasG signals that regulate development and
cytoskeletal function in Dictyostelium

T. Zhang, P.J. Rebstein, M. Khosla, J. Cardelli, G. Buczynski, J. Bush,
G.B. Spiegelman and G. Weeks

Departments of Microbiology and Immunology and Medical Genetics, University
of British Columbia, 6174 University Blvd., Vancouver, V6T 1Z3

Exp. Cell Res., accepted

ABSTRACT

   The expression of an activated RasG protein, RasG-G12T, in vegetative 
cells of Dictyostelium discoideium produced an alteration in cell morphology.  
Cells underwent a transition between an extensively flattened form that 
exhibited lateral membrane ruffling to a less flattened form that exhibited 
prominent dorsal membrane ruffling.  These rasG-G12T transformants exhibited 
a redistribution of F-actin at the cell periphery and did not undergo the 
rapid contraction upon refeeding that is characteristic of wild type cells.  
These results suggest a role for RasG in regulating cytoskeletal rearrangement 
in D. discoideum.  We had shown previously that expression of rasG-G12T 
inhibited starvation induced aggregation (Khosla et al., 1996, Mol Cell Biol, 
16, 4156-4162).  rasG-G12T genes containing secondary mutations were 
transformed into cells to test whether the effects of rasG-G12T were 
transmitted through a single downstream effector.  Cells expressing rasG-
G12T/T35S or rasG-G12T/Y40C (secondary mutations within the effector domain) 
exhibited normal morphology and underwent normal aggregation, suggesting that 
signalling through the effector domain was required for both the morphological 
and development changes induced by rasG-G12T.  In contrast, cells expressing 
rasG-G12T/T45Q (a secondary mutation in the effector distal flanking domain) 
exhibited normal aggregation but a morphology indistinguishable from that of 
rasG-G12T transformants.  This result suggests that RasG regulates 
developmental and cytoskeletal functions by direct interaction with more than 
one downstream effectors.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 12, number 3]

  