Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 12, number 10
May 8, 1999

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

================
  Announcement
================

Due in part to Robert Insall's move to Birmingham, the European mirror 
of the Dicty Web site no longer functions.  It appears that the internet
links between europe and the US are functioning well, so it is not clear we
need the european mirror.  We propose to dispense with the mirror.  If you 
experience problems with you connections to the Dicty site, or have other
thoughts regarding this please let us know at dicty@nwu.edu.

==============
  Abstracts
==============

A myb-related protein required for culmination in Dictyostelium.

Kunde Guo , Christophe Anjard , Adrian Harwood , Hyun-Ji Kim , Peter C. 
Newell  and Julian D. Gross. 

Dept of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, 
Oxford OX1 3QU. U.K.

Development (in press). 

Abstract:

   The avian retroviral v-myb gene and its cellular homologues throughout 
the animal and plant kingdoms contain a conserved DNA binding domain. We 
have isolated an insertional mutant of Dictyostelium unable to switch from 
slug migration to fruiting body formation i.e. unable to culminate. The gene 
that is disrupted, mybC, codes for a protein with a myb-like domain that 
is recognized by an antibody against the v-myb repeat domain. During 
development of myb+ cells, mybC is expressed only in prestalk cells.  
When developed together with wild type cells mybC- cells are able to 
form both spores and stalk cells very efficiently. Their developmental 
defect is also bypassed by overexpressing cAMP-dependent protein kinase. 
However even when their defect is bypassed, mybC null slugs and culminates 
produce little if any of the intercellular signalling peptides SDF-1 and 
SDF-2 that are believed to be released by prestalk cells at culmination. 
We propose that the mybC gene product is required for an intercellular 
signaling process controlling maturation of stalk cells and spores and 
that SDF-1 and/or SDF-2 may be implicated in this process. 
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

IDENTIFICATION OF CIS-REGULATING ELEMENTS AND TRANS-ACTING FACTORS REGULATING
THE EXPRESSION OF THE GENE ENCODING THE SMALL SUBUNIT OF RIBONUCLEOTIDE
REDUCTASE IN DICTYOSTELIUM DISCOIDEUM

Claire Bonfils1,4, Pascale Gaudet2,3, and Adrian Tsang1,2,3

1Department of Biology, 2Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, and 3Centre
for Structural and Functional Genomics, Concordia University, Montreal, Quebec,
H3G 1M8, Canada 
4Present address: MethylGene Inc., 7220 Frederick-Banting, Ville St-Laurent,
Quebec, H4S 2A1, Canada

Journal of Biological Chemistry, accepted

SUMMARY

   We have examined the promoter of rnrB, the gene encoding the small subunit 
of ribonucleotide reductase of Dictyostelium discoideum, using lacZ as a 
reporter gene. Deletion analysis showed that expression of this gene in 
vegetative cells involves an A/T-rich element whereas its  expression in 
prespore cells during development requires a region encompassing two G/C-rich 
elements, designated box A and box B. Removal of boxes A and B results in very 
low level of activity. When either box A or box B is deleted, prestalk cells 
adjacent to the prespore zone also express _-galactosidase. The behaviour of 
these cis-regulatory elements implies that the mechanism regulating the 
prespore-specific expression of rnrB is different from that regulating other 
known prespore genes.  We have used electrophoretic mobility shift assays 
to identify factors that interact with box A and box B. Box A interacts 
with a factor that is found in the nuclear fraction. While box B interacts 
with a factor that is present in the cytosolic fraction throughout growth 
and development, its presence in the nuclear fraction is developmentally 
regulated. Results from competition assays suggest that both box A and 
box B interact with transcriptional activators that have not been 
characterized previously. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Endocytic transit in Dictyostelium

Markus Maniak

MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College London, 
London, UK

Protoplasma, in press

Summary. 

   The cells of Dictyostelium are soil amoebae with a simple endocytic 
pathway: Particles or fluid are taken up at the plasma membrane in a 
process dependent on the actin cytoskeleton. After rapid acidification 
and subsequent neutralisation of the food vacuoles during which breakdown 
of the contents occurs, indigestible remnants are exocytosed. This tight 
coupling between endocytosis and exocytosis is thought to maintain membrane 
homeostasis. In spite of the apparent overall difference between the 
endocytic pathways of mammalian cells and Dictyostelium, conserved 
proteins are involved in individual steps of endocytic transport, possibly 
indicating that in mammalian cells it is only the routing of marker that 
has evolved from a simple transit to a complex, branched pathway. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Disturbed communication between actin- and nucleotide binding sites in a
myosin II with truncated 50K/20K junction

Menno L.W. Knetsch 1, Taro Q.P. Uyeda 2, and Dietmar J. Manstein 1

1)Max-Planck-Institute for Medical Research, Dept. of Biophysics, 
Jahnstrasse 29, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany and 2) Bionic Design Group, 
National Institute for advanced Interdisciplinary Research, AIST, 1-1-4
Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305, Japan

J. Biol. Chem (in press.)

ABSTRACT

   The kinetic and functional consequences of deleting nine residues from 
an actin-binding surface loop (loop 2) were examined to investigate the 
role of this region in myosin function. The nucleotide-binding properties 
of myosin were not altered by the deletion. However, the deletion affected 
actin binding and the communication between the actin- and nucleotide-binding 
sites. The affinity of M765NL for actin (644 nM) was approximately 100-fold 
lower than that of wild-type construct M765 (5.8 nM).  Despite this reduction 
in affinity, actin binding weakened the affinity of ADP for the motor to a 
similar extent for both mutant and wild-type constructs. The addition of 0.5 
mM actin decreased ADP affinity from 0.6 mM to 34 mM for M765NL and from 1.6 
mM to 39 mM for M765. In contrast, communication between the actin- and 
nucleotide-binding sites appears disturbed in regard to Pi-release: thus, 
basal ATPase activity for M765NL (0.19 s-1) was 3-fold larger than for M765 
(0.06 s-1) and the stimulation of ATPase activity by actin was 5-fold lower 
for M765NL. These results indicate different paths of communication between 
the actin- and nucleotide-binding sites, in regard to ADP- and Pi-release, 
and they confirm that loop 2 is involved in high affinity actin binding.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ribosomal protein gene expression is cell type specific during development 
in Dictyostelium discoideum. 

Ameeta K. Agarwal, Susan N. Parrish and Daphne D. Blumberg

Department of Biological Science, University of Maryland Baltimore County
1000 Hilltop Circle, Baltimore, Md. 21250

In press in Differentiation.

ABSTRACT:     

   Starvation for amino acids initiates the developmental cycle in the 
Cellular Slime Mold, Dictyostelium discoideum. Upon starvation one of 
the earliest developmental events is the selective loss of the ribosomal 
protein mRNAs from polysomes. This loss depends upon sequences in the 5’ 
non-translated leader of the r-protein mRNAs. Here evidence is presented 
which indicates that those cells which will become prestalk cells express 
the ribosomal protein genes during development under starvation conditions.  
Cells which enter the prespore pathway shut off r-protein synthesis. The 
promoter and 5’ non-translated leader sequences from two ribosomal protein 
genes, the rp-L11 and the rp-S9 genes, are fused to the E.coli -galactosidase 
reporter gene. While   -galactosidase enzyme activity is detected in situ  
in most growing cells, by 15 hours of development -galactosidase enzyme 
activity is largely lost from the prespore cells although strong  
-galactosidase enzyme activity is present in the prestalk cells. These 
observations suggest the possibility that the ribosomal protein mRNAs 
are excluded from polysomes in a cell type specific manner.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dictyostelium ribosomal protein genes and the elongation factor 1B gene 
show co-ordinate developmental regulation which is under post-transcriptional 
control.

Ameeta K. Agarwal and Daphne D. Blumberg

Department of Biological Science, University of Maryland Baltimore County
1000 Hilltop Circle, Baltimore, Md. 21250

In press in Differentiation 

ABSTRACT:

   Starvation for amino acids initiates the developmental program in 
the Cellular Slime Mold, Dictyostelium discoideum.  One of the earliest 
developmental events is the decline in ribosomal protein synthesis. The 
ribosomal protein mRNAs are excluded from polysomes within 20 minutes to 
1 hour following the removal of nutrients and their mRNA levels decline 
sharply at about 9 hours into the 24 hour developmental cycle. It has 
been generally assumed that the decline in r- protein mRNA levels during 
late development reflected a decline in the transcription rate.  Here we 
demonstrate that this is not the case. The transcription rates of three 
ribosomal protein genes, rpL11, rpL23 and rpS9 as well as an elongation 
factor 1B gene have been determined during growth and development in 
Dictyostelium. Throughout growth and development the transcription rate 
of the ribosomal protein genes remains relatively constant at 0.2 to 0.5% 
of the rate of rRNA transcription while the elongation factor 1B gene is 
transcribed at 0.4 to 0.6% of the rRNA rate. This low but constant 
transcription rate is in contrast to a spore coat protein gene Psp D 
which is transcribed at 6% of the rRNA rate in late developing cells. 
The elongation factor 1B gene appears to be co-regulated with the ribosomal 
protein genes both in terms of its transcription rate and mRNA accumulation.  
Dictyostelium has been a popular model for understanding signal transduction 
and the growth to differentiation transition, thus it is of significance that 
the regulation of ribosome biosynthesis in Dictyostelium resembles that of 
higher eukaryotes in being regulated largely at the post-transcriptional 
level in response to starvation as opposed to yeasts where the regulation 
is largely transcriptional.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 12, number 10]

  