Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 12, number 2
January 16, 1999

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

==============
  Abstracts
==============

Cytokinesis mediated through the recruitment of cortexillins into the 
cleavage furrow

Igor Weber, Günther Gerisch, Christina Heizer, John Murphy, Kim Badelt,
Alexander Stock, Jean-Marc Schwartz and Jan Faix

Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie, Am Klopferspitz 18a, D-82152 Martinsried, 
Germany.

EMBO Journal, in press

Abstract:

  The fact that substrate-anchored Dictyostelium cells undergo cytokinesis 
in the absence of myosin II underscores the importance of other proteins 
in enabling the cleavage furrow to constrict. Cortexillins, a pair of actin-
bundling proteins, are required for normal cleavage. They are targeted to 
the incipient furrow in wild-type and, more prominently, in myosin II-null 
cells. No other F-actin bundling or crosslinking protein tested is co-localized. 
GFP-fusions show that the N-terminal actin-binding domain of cortexillin I is 
dispensable and the C-terminal region is sufficient for translocation to the 
furrow and the rescue of cytokinesis.  Cortexillins are supposed to have a 
targeting signal for coupling to a myosin II-independent system that directs 
transport of membrane proteins to the cleavage furrow.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

RacF1, a novel member of the Rho protein family in Dictyostelium discoideum, 
associates transiently with cell contact areas, macropinosomes and phagosomes.

Francisco Rivero1,2; Richard Albrecht2,  Heidrun Dislich1, Enrico Bracco2,3; 
Laura Graciotti2, Salvatore Bozzaro3 and Angelika A. Noegel1,2.

1Institut für Biochemie I, Medizinische Fakultät, Universität zu Köln,
Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 52, 50931 Köln, FRG
2Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie, Am Klopferspitz 18a, 82152 Martinsried,
FRG
3Dipartimento di Scienze Cliniche e Biologiche, Ospedale S. Luigi Gonzaga,
Regione Gonzole 10, 10043 Orbassano-Torino, Italy

Molecular Biology of the Cell, in press.

Abstract:

   Using a PCR approach we have isolated racF1, a novel member of the 
Rho family in Dictyostelium. The racF1 gene encodes a protein of 193 amino 
acids and is constitutively expressed throughout the Dictyostelium life cycle. 
Highest identity (94%) was found to a RacF2 isoform, to Dictyostelium Rac1A, 
Rac1B and Rac1C (70%), and to Rac proteins of animal species (64-69%). To 
investigate the role of RacF1 in cytoskeleton-dependent processes, we have 
fused it at its amino-terminus with green fluorescent protein (GFP) and 
studied the dynamics of subcellular redistribution using a confocal laser 
scanning microscope and a double view microscope system. GFP-RacF1 was 
homogeneously distributed in the cytosol and accumulated at the plasma 
membrane, especially at regions of transient intercellular contacts. 
GFP-RacF1 also localized transiently to macropinosomes and phagocytic 
cups, and was gradually released within less than one minute after 
formation of the endocytic vesicle or the phagosome, respectively. Upon 
stimulation with cAMP, no enrichment of GFP-RacF1 was observed in leading 
fronts, from which it was found to be initially excluded. Cell lines were 
obtained using homologous recombination that expressed a truncated racF1 
gene lacking sequences encoding the carboxyl-terminal region responsible 
for membrane targeting. These cells displayed normal phagocytosis, 
endocytosis and exocytosis rates. Our results suggest that RacF1 associates 
with dynamic structures that are formed during pinocytosis and phagocytosis. 
Although RacF1 appears not to be essential, it might act in concert and/or 
share functions with other members of the Rho family in the regulation of a 
subset of cytoskeletal rearrangements that are required for these processes.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Glycogen Synthase Kinase-3 (GSK-3) is regulated during Dictyostelium
development via the serpentine receptor cAR3

Simon E. Plyte, Emma O’Donovan, James R. Woodgett, and Adrian J. Harwood

Development 126, 325-333.

Abstract

   Glycogen Synthase Kinase-3 (GSK-3) is required during metazoan development 
to mediate the effects of the extracellular signal wingless/Wnt-1 and hence 
is necessary for correct cell type specification. GSK-3 also regulates cell 
fate during Dictyostelium development, but in this case it appears to 
mediate the effects of extracellular cAMP. By direct measurement of GSK-3 
kinase activity during Dictyostelium development, we find that there is a 
rise in activity at the initiation of multicellular development which can 
be induced by cAMP. The timing of the rise correlates with the requirement 
for the Dictyostelium homologue of GSK-3, gskA, to specify cell fate. We 
show that loss of the cAMP receptor cAR3 almost completely abolishes the 
rise in kinase activity and causes a mis-specification of cell fate that 
is equivalent to that seen in a gskA- mutant. The phenotype of a cAR3- 
mutant however is less severe than loss of gskA and ultimately gives rise 
to an apparently wild type fruiting body. These results indicate that in 
Dictyostelium extracellular cAMP acts via cAR3 to cause a rise in GSKA 
kinase activity which regulates cell type patterning during the initial 
stages of multicellularity.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Small Mr Ras-like GTPase Rap1 Interacts with the Phospholipase C Pathway
to Regulate Phagocytosis in Dictyostelium discoideum

David J. Seastone1, Linyi Zhang1, Greg Buczynski1, Patrick Rebstein2,
Gerald Weeks2, George Spiegelman2, and James Cardelli1 3 *

1 Department of Microbiology and Immunology and 3 Feist-Weiller Cancer
Center  Louisiana State University Medical Center
Shreveport, LA  71130
2  Department of Microbiology  University of British Columbia  Vancouver,
B.C.  Canada V6T 1Z3   

Molecular Biology of the Cell (in press)

ABSTRACT

   The function of the small Mr Ras-like GTPase Rap1 remains largely 
unknown, but this protein has been demonstrated to regulate cortical 
actin-based morphologic changes in Dictyostelium, and the oxidative 
burst in mammalian neutrophils. To test if Rap1 regulates phagocytosis, 
we biochemically analyzed cell-lines that conditionally overexpressed 
wild-type (Rap1 WT(+)), constitutively active (Rap1 G12T(+)), and 
dominant negative (Rap1 S17N(+)) forms of D. discoideum Rap1 at levels 
less than 6 fold higher levels endogenous Rap1.  The rates of phagocytosis 
of bacteria and latex beads were significantly higher in Rap1 WT (+) and 
Rap1 G12T (+) cells, and were reduced in  Rap1 S17N(+) cells.  The 
addition of inhibitors of protein kinase A, protein kinase G, protein 
tyrosine kinase or PI 3-kinase to wild-type cells did not affect 
phagocytosis rates. In contrast, the addition of U73122 (a phospholipase 
C inhibitor), calphostin C (a protein kinase C inhibitor) and BAPTA-AM 
(an intracellular Ca2+ chelator) to control cultures reduced phagocytosis 
rates by 90%, 50% and 65%, respectively, suggesting both arms of the PLC 
pathway played a role in this process. Other PKC-specific inhibitors, 
such as chelerythrine and bisindolylmaleimide I, did not reduce phagocytosis 
rates in control cells, suggesting calphostin C was affecting phagocytosis 
by interfering with a protein containing a diacylglycerol (DAG)-binding domain.  
The addition of calphostin C did not reduce phagocytosis rates in  Rap1 
G12T(+) cells, suggesting that the putative DAG-binding protein acted 
upstream in a signalling pathway with Rap1.  Surprisingly, macropinocytosis 
was significantly reduced in Rap1 WT(+) and Rap1 G12T(+) cells as compared 
to control cells. Together our results suggest that Rap1 and Ca2+ may act 
together to coordinate important early events regulating phagocytosis. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 12, number 2]

  