Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 12, number 7
March 20, 1999

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

==============================
 Dicty Research Lab Web Pages
==============================

If your lab has a web page describing your work using Dictyostelium
please be sure that it is listed on the Dicty web site at 
http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html.  If your site is not listed
send the address of your web site to dicty@nwu.edu.


==============
  Abstracts
==============

Cisplatin inhibits folicacid chemotaxis and phagocytotic functions 
in Dictyostelium discoideum.

T.B.K.Reddy* and S.Chatterjee

School of Life Sciences,  Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi-110067. 

INDIA.
*corresponding author&present address.

Center for Molecular Genetics, University of California, San Diego 9500 
Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA-92093-0634 USA.

Cell Biology International., in press

Summary.

   Here we report the action of cisplatin (a widely used anticancer 
drug) on some basic cellular functions of this eucaryotic model system.  
Administration of 100 and 200 ug/ml of cisplatin [cis-diammine dichloro 
platinum (II)] for 1hr to growing Dictyostelium discoideum cells severely 
affects folic acid chemotaxis and phagocytotic functions in this organism.  
Following cisplatin treatment cells show a much lower uptake of FITC 
labelled bacteria and a reduced plaque forming ability when plated on 
E.coli seeded normal agar. Folic acid chemotaxis and folate deaminase 
activity are greatly inhibited in cisplatin treated Dictyostelium cells.  
SDS-PAGE analysis show a greater association of actin and myosin with cell 
cortex of the treated cells. These results have beeen discussed in relation 
to cisplatin’s known function of rising the levels of cytosolic calcium. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Chemoattractant-mediated transient activation and membrane localization 
of Akt/PKB is required for efficient chemotaxis to cAMP in Dictyostelium

Ruedi Meili, Charlene Ellsworth, Susan Lee, T. B. K. Reddy, Hui Ma, 
and Richard A. Firtel

EMBO J., in press.

SUMMARY

   Chemotaxis-competent cells respond to a variety of ligands by activating 
second messenger pathways leading to changes in the actin/myosin cytoskeleton 
and directed cell movement. We demonstrate that Dictyostelium Akt/PKB, a 
homologue of mammalian Akt/PKB, is very rapidly and transiently activated 
by the chemoattractant cAMP. This activation takes place through G protein-
coupled chemoattractant receptors via a pathway that requires homologues of 
mammalian p110 phosphoinositide-3 kinase. pkbA null cells exhibit aggregation-
stage defects that include aberrant chemotaxis, a failure to properly polarize 
in a chemoattractant gradient and aggregate at low densities. Mechanistically, 
we demonstrate that the PH domain of Akt/PKB fused to GFP transiently 
translocates to the plasma membrane in response to cAMP with kinetics similar 
to those of Akt/PKB kinase activation and is localized to the leading edge of 
chemotaxing cells in vivo. Our results indicate Akt/PKB is part of the 
regulatory network required for sensing and responding to the chemoattractant 
gradient that mediates chemotaxis and aggregation.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The tip Genes Act in Parallel Pathways of Early Dictyostelium Development

Justin T. Stege, Michael T. Laub and William F. Loomis

Center for Molecular Genetics, Department of Biology, University of California 
San Diego, La Jolla California 92093

Developmemtal Genetics, in press

ABSTRACT

   Analysis of Dictyostelium strains carrying null mutations in tipA 
revealed a primary defect in cell sorting and the formation of tips on 
the developing mound.  To further study the process affected in tipA- 
mutants, other mutants with a similar phenotype were isolated and characterized.  
These studies revealed three new Dictyostelium genes, tipB, tipC, and tipD.  
All of the tip mutants aggregate into larger than average mounds which split 
up and form many tips on their surfaces. Furthermore, each mutant exhibits 
reduced or aberrant cell sorting behavior, never makes migrating slugs, and 
has severely reduced fruiting body and spore production.  The mRNA of each 
tip gene is present in vegetative cells and does not vary significantly with 
development.  Prespore and prestalk gene expression is reduced or delayed in 
the tip mutants indicating cell type differentiation is dependent on the 
function of these genes.  Developing mutant cells in chimeric mixtures with 
wild type cells revealed that the defects in each tip mutant behave cell 
autonomously.  The overexpression of TipA in a tipB-background and the 
overexpression of TipB in a tipA- background significantly improved the 
morphogenesis of these mutants.  These were the only situations where the 
expression of one tip gene could compensate for the lack of a different 
tip gene.  Except for the tipA-/tipB- strain, double mutations in the tip 
genes have additive effects, causing a more severe mutant phenotype with 
defects earlier in development than single mutants.  The tipA-/tipB- double 
mutant does not show additive effects and is very similar to the tipA- 
single mutant.  Analysis of the effects of double mutations and overexpression 
indicates that members of this class of genes appear to act through parallel 
pathways of differentiation and tip formation in early Dictyostelium development.  
Furthermore, TipA and TipB appear to have some overlapping functions or are 
involvement in the same pathway.  The multitipped phenotype observed in all 
the mutants may be a general result of perturbing early developmental events 
such as cell type differentiation and cell type proportioning.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Architectural dynamics of F-actin in eupodia suggests their role 
for invasive locomotion in Dictyostelium. 

Fukui, Y., E. de Hostos, S. Yumura, T. Kitanishi-Yumura, and S. Inoué

Exp. Cell Res., in press

Summary

   Eupodia are F-actin-containing cortical structures similar to vertebrate 
podosomes or invadopodia found in metastatic cells. Eupodia are rich 
alpha-actinin and myosin IB/D, but not a Dictyostelium homologue of talin 
[1]. In the present study, we localized other actin-binding proteins ABP120, 
cofilin, coronin and fimbrin in the eupodia, and examined the three-dimensional 
organization of their F-actin system by confocal microscopy and transmission 
electron microscopy. To examine their function, we analyzed the assembly and 
disassembly dynamics of the F-actin system in eupodia and its relation to 
lamellipodial protrusion. Actin dynamics was examined by monitoring S65T-GFP-
coronin and rhodamine-actin using a real-time confocal unit and a digital 
microscope system. Fluorescence morphometric analysis demonstrates the presence 
of a precise spatiotemporal coupling between F-actin assembly in eupodia and 
lamellipodial protrusion. When a lamellipodium advances to invade a tight space, 
additional rows of eupodia are sequentially formed at the base of that 
lamellipodium. These results indicate that mechanical stress at the leading 
edge modulates the structural integrity of actin and its binding proteins, 
such that eupodia are formed when anchorage is needed to boost for invasive 
protrusion of the leading edge.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A unique talin homologue with a villin headpiece-like domain is required
for multicellular morphogenesis in Dictyostelium

M. Tsujioka, L. M. Machesky*, S. L. Cole**, K. Yahata, and K. Inouye

Department of Botany, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, 
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan. 

*MRC Laboratory for Molecular Biology, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QH, UK.  
(Present address : Department of Biochemistry, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, B15-2TT, UK)

**MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College London,
Gower St, London WC1E 6BT, UK

Current Biology, in press

Abstract

   One important aspect of multicellular morphogenesis is the mechanical 
one involving the intracellular and extracellular architecture on which 
forces are exerted to cause changes of tissue shape.  Molecules involved 
in the interaction between the extracellular matrix, cell membrane and 
cytoskeleton are therefore of central importance in morphogenesis.  Talin 
is a large cytoskeletal protein with a modular structure consisting of an 
N-terminal membrane-interacting domain with sequence similarities to 
members of the band 4.1 family and a C-terminal region containing F-actin 
and vinculin-binding domains [1, 2]. It also interacts with the cytoplasmic 
tail of beta integrins which on the external face of the membrane bind to 
extracellular matrix proteins [3].  However, the possible roles of talin 
in multicellular morphogenesis in development remain largely unexplored. 
In Dictyostelium, a eukaryotic microorganism capable of multicellular 
morphogenesis, a talin homologue has been identified and shown to play 
an important role in cell-to-substrate adhesion and maintenance of normal 
elastic properties of the cell [4, 5, 6]. Here we describe a second talin 
homologue which is required for multicellular morphogenesis in the development 
of Dictyostelium. Unlike any other talin known so far, it contains an additional 
C-terminal domain homologous to the villin headpiece.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Interaction Mapping of a Dynein Heavy Chain: Identification of Dimerization 
and Intermediate-Chain Binding Domains.

Andrea Habura, Irina Tikhonenko, Rex L. Chisholm, and Michael P. Koonce.

Division of Molecular Medicine, Wadsworth Center, Empire State Plaza, 
Albany, NY 12201-0509. Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, 
Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago, IL, 60611-3072.

J. Biol. Chem, in press

SUMMARY.

   Cytoplasmic dynein is a multisubunit microtubule-based motor protein 
that is involved in several eukaryotic cell motilities. Two dynein heavy 
chains each form a motor domain that connects to a common cargo-binding 
tail.  While this tail domain is composed of multiple polypeptides, subunit 
organization within this region is poorly understood. Here we present an in 
vitro dissection of the tail-forming region of the dynein heavy chain from 
Dictyostelium. Our work identifies a sequence important for dimerization and 
for binding the dynein intermediate chain. The core of this motif localizes 
within a ~ 150 aa region that is strongly conserved among other cytoplasmic 
dyneins. This level of conservation does not extend to the axonemal dynein 
heavy chains, suggesting functional differences between the two. Dimerization 
appears to occur through a different mechanism than the heavy chain-intermediate 
chain interaction. We corroborate the in vitro interactions with in vivo 
expression of heavy chain fragments in Dictyostelium. Fragments lacking the 
interaction domain express well, without an obvious phenotype. On the other 
hand, the region crucial for both interactions appears to be lethal when 
overexpressed.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Kinetic Analysis of Dictyostelium discoideum Myosin Motor Domains with
Glycine-to-Alanine Mutations in the Reactive Thiol Region

Renu Batra, Michael A. Geeves§, and Dietmar J. Manstein

Max-Planck-Institut für Medizinische Forschung, Jahnstr. 29, D-69120
Heidelberg, Germany and Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Physiologie,
Postfach 102664, D-44026 Dortmund, Germany 
§ Current address: Department of Biosciences, University of Kent, Canterbury, 
Kent, UK.

Biochemistry, in press

ABSTRACT

   Three conserved glycine residues in the reactive thiol region of 
Dictyostelium discoideum myosin II were replaced by alanine residues. The 
resulting mutants G680A, G684A and G691A were expressed in the soluble myosin 
head fragment M761-2R [Anson, M., Geeves, M.A., Kurzawa, S.E. and Manstein, 
D.J. (1996) EMBO J. 15, 6069-6074] and characterized using transient kinetic 
methods. Mutant G691A shows no major alterations except for a marked increase 
in basal Mg2+-ATPase activity. Phosphate release seems to be facilitated by 
this mutation and the addition of actin to G691A stimulates ATP turnover not 
more than 3-fold. In comparison to M761-2R, mutant constructs G691A and G684A 
show a 4-fold reduction in the rate of the ATP cleavage step. Most other 
changes in the kinetic properties of G684A are small (~2-fold). In contrast, 
substitution of G680 by an alanine residue leads to large changes in nucleotide 
binding. Compared to M761-2R, rates of nucleotide binding are 20-30-fold slower 
and the affinity for mantADP is approximately 10-fold increased due to a 200-
fold reduction in dissociation rate constant of mantADP. The ATP-induced 
dissociation of actin from the acto.G680A complex is normal but coupling between 
binding of actin and ADP appears disrupted as G680A and acto.G680A show the same 
affinity for ADP.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 12, number 7]

  