Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 12, number 4
January 30, 1999

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

========================
 Important Announcement
========================

NIH Workshop on Non-Mammalian Model Organisms.  February 16 and 17, 1999
Harold Varmus has invited about 100 top scientists from around the country 
to a meeting at NIH in February to consider the strengths, weaknesses and 
needs of a variety of non-mammalian model organisms. While S. cerevisiae, 
Drosophila, C. elegans, zebrafish and Xenopus are established model 
organisms, other organisms may be added to the list in the future. I 
have been invited to present a 10 minute pitch for Dictyostelium. I will 
be joined by Rich Kessin and Carole Parent at this workshop. Other 
organisms under consideration include Tetrahymena, Neurosporra, S. pombe, 
Chlamydemonas, Aplysia, Sea urchins, Fugu and chickens.

They specifically asked that we discuss the advantages of the organism 
and outline the needs of the field. They encouraged us to prioritize the 
specific requests. Each speaker is limited to 3 overheads and so space is 
at a premium. With this in mind, I have prepared drafts of the overheads 
presenting the advantages of Dictyostelium and the resources that will 
advance functional genomics in the field.

Since decisions made following this meeting will affect us all, I encourage 
everyone to consider the Advantages and Resources for the Future of 
Dictyostelium and let me know their views. We will then be able to present a 
consensus view of the field.

Bill Loomis


ADVANTAGES OF DICTYOSTELIUM AS A MODEL SYSTEM

1)	Microbial and molecular genetics permit rapid construction 
	of complex genotypes
2)	Detailed maps of the 6 chromosomes ( resolution ± 50 kb)
3)	34 Mb genome in the process of being sequenced (near 
	completion in 2001)
4)	Efficient homologous recombination permits gene replacement
5)	Diverse phenotypes including:
	a)	phagocytosis
	b)	cytokinesis
	c)	cell motility
	d)	chemotaxis
	e)	other cell-cell signaling networks
6)	Reliable, inexpensive cell growth and strain storage
7)	Ready recovery of each cell type in biochemical quantities 
	throughout the 24 hour developmental cycle.


RESOURCES FOR THE FUTURE

1)	Completion of the sequence of the genome (finishing steps).
2)	Focused funtional analyses of conserved genes in diverse 
	contexts.
3)	Arrayed DNA on chips to permit expression studies of every 
	ORF throughout the 24 hour developmental cycle.
4)	High resolution computer-assisted microscopy of pertinent 
	mutant strains.
5)	Proteome studies - patterns of protein accumulation in wild 
	type and mutant strains throughout the 24 hour developmental 
	cycle.
6)	User-friendly databases of genomic, mutational, and analytic 
	information.
7)	Centralized stock storage and distribution center.

[Editor's note:  I would encourage everyone who has thoughts or 
suggestions to share them with the Dictyostelium community via the 
listserv (dicty@listserv.acns.nwu.edu).  It would be great to have an 
active discussion of these issues with everyone participating.]

==============
  Abstracts
==============


Multiple developmental roles for CRAC, a cytosolic regulator of adenylyl 
cyclase.

Bin Wang1, Gad Shaulsky2 and Adam Kuspa1

1. Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry, 2. Department of 
Molecular and Human Genetics   Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, 
USA 77030

Devel. Biol., in press

SUMMARY

   Receptor-mediated activation of adenylyl cyclase (ACA) in Dictyostelium 
requires CRAC protein.  Upon translocation to the membrane, this pleckstrin 
homology (PH) domain protein stimulates ACA thereby mediating developmental 
aggregation.  CRAC may also have roles later in development since CRAC-null 
cells can respond to chemotactic signals and participate in developmental 
aggregation when admixed with wild-type cells, but they do not complete 
development within such chimeras.  To test whether the role of CRAC in 
post-aggregative development is related to the activation of ACA, 
chemotactic aggregation was bypassed in CRAC-null cells by activating the 
cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA).  While such strains formed mounds, 
they did not complete fruiting body morphogenesis or form spores.  
Expression of CRAC in the prespore cells of these strains rescued 
sporulation and fruiting body formation.  This later function of CRAC 
does not appear to require its PH domain since the C-terminal portion 
of the protein (CRAC-DPH) can substitute for full-length CRAC in promoting 
spore cell formation and morphogenesis.  No detectable ACA activation was 
observed in any of the CRAC-null strains rescued by PKA activation and 
expression of CRAC-DPH.  Finally, we found that the development of CRAC-
null ACA-null double mutants could be rescued by the activation of PKA 
together with the expression of CRAC-DPH.  Thus, there appears to be a 
required function for CRAC in post-aggregative development that is 
independent of its previously described function in the ACA activation 
pathway.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Identification of a suppressor of the Dictyostelium profilin-minus
phenotype as a CD36/LIMPII homologue

Iakowos Karakesisoglou*‡, Klaus-Peter Janssen*, Ludwig Eichinger, 
Angelika A. Noegel§, and Michael Schleicher 

*These authors contributed equally to this work. 

A.-Butenandt-Institut für Zellbiologie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, 
80336 München, FRG. 
§Institut für Biochemie I, Universität zu Köln, 50931 Köln, FRG. 
‡ present address: Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular 
Genetics, Cell Biology, Biochemistry, and Molecular Biology, The University 
of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA. 

J. Cell Biol., in press

Profilin is an ubiquitous G-actin binding protein in eukaryotic cells. 
Lack of both profilin isoforms in Dictyostelium discoideum resulted in 
impaired cytokinesis and an arrest in development. A restriction enzyme-
mediated integration approach was applied to profilin-minus cells to 
identify suppressor mutants for the developmental phenotype. A mutant 
with wild-type like development and restored cytokinesis was isolated. 
The gene affected was found to code for an integral membrane glycoprotein 
of a predicted size of 88 kD containing two transmembrane domains, one 
at the NH2-terminus and the other at the COOH-terminus. It is homologous 
to mammalian CD36/LIMPII and represents the first member of this family 
in D. discoideum, therefore the name DdLIMP is proposed. Targeted 
disruption of the lmpA gene in the profilin-minus background also 
rescued the mutant phenotype.  Immunofluorescence revealed a localization 
in vesicles and ring-like structures on the cell surface. Partially purified 
DdLIMP bound specifically to PIP2 in sedimentation and gel filtration assays. 
A direct interaction between DdLIMP and profilin could not be detected, and 
it is yet unclear how far upstream in a regulatory cascade DdLIMP might be 
positioned. The PIP2 binding of DdLIMP however points towards a funcion via 
the phosphatidylinositol pathway, a major regulator of profilin. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

In vivo observations of myosin II dynamics support a role in rear 
retraction.

Patricia A. Clow and James G. McNally

Department of Biology and Institute for Biomedical Computing, Washington 
University, Box 1229, St. Louis, Missouri 63130

Molecular Biology of the Cell, in press.

Summary.

   To investigate myosin II function in cell movement within a cell mass, 
we imaged GFP-myosin heavy chain (GFP-MHC) cells moving within the tight 
mound of Dictyostelium discoideum.  In the posterior cortex of cells 
undergoing rotational motion around the center of the mound, GFP-MHC 
cyclically formed a "C" which converted to a spot as the cell retracted 
its rear.  Consistent with an important role for myosin in rotation, cells 
failed to rotate when they lacked the myosin II heavy chain (MHC-) or when 
they contained predominantly monomeric myosin II (3xAsp).  In cells lacking 
the myosin II regulatory light chain (RLC-), rotation was impaired and 
eventually ceased.  These rotational defects reflect a mechanical problem 
in the 3xAsp and RLC- cells, since these mutants exhibited proper rotational 
guidance cues.  MHC- cells exhibited disorganized and erratic rotational 
guidance cues, suggesting a requirement for the MHC in organizing these signals.  
However, the MHC- cells also exhibited mechanical defects in rotation, since 
they still moved aberrantly when seeded into wild-type mounds with proper 
rotational guidance cues.  The mechanical defects in rotation may be mediated 
by the "C"-to-spot, since RLC- cells exhibited a defective "C"-to-spot, 
including a slower "C"-to-spot transition, consistent with this mutant’s 
slower rotational velocity.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Binding and catalytic properties of the Cdc2 and Crp proteins of 
Dictyostelium

Shiv K. Sharma, Christine Michaelis, Ki-Young Lee, Jerry  H. Wang
and Gerald Weeks

Department of Microbiology and Immunology1, and Department of Medical 
Genetics5, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, B. C. V6T 1Z3
Canada

Exp. Cell Res., in press

ABSTRACT

   Dictyostelium expresses at least two proteins of the Cdk family of 
protein kinases, Cdc2 and Crp.  Cdc2 levels remain relatively constant 
during differentiation, whereas the levels of Crp increase dramatically 
as differentiation progresses.  Crp is highly related to the mammalian 
Cdk5 and p25, a truncated form of p35, the activating subunit of Cdk5 
from mammalian brain, stimulates the histone H1 kinase activity of 
GST-Crp by several fold.  In contrast, p25 does not stimulate the histone 
H1 kinase activity of GST-Cdc2 or the Cdc2 activity present in cell 
extracts from vegetative Dictyostelium cells.  GST-Cdc2, in vitro 
translated Cdc2 and Cdc2 from all stages of differentiation bind to 
p13suc1.  In contrast, GST-Crp, in vitro translated Crp and the Crp 
protein present in cell extracts do not bind to p13suc1.  We have 
confirmed a previous report by Arakane and Maeda (J. Plant Res.  
1997 110, 81-85.) that there is a peak of p13suc1 bound histone H1 
kinase activity during late development, but we found that there was 
no corresponding peak of p13suc1 bound Cdc2 protein that corresponds 
to this activity.  Taken together, these data suggest that neither 
Cdc2 nor Crp is responsible for the late developmental peak of histone 
H1 kinase activity that binds to p13suc1.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 12, number 4]

  