Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 12, number 1
January 9, 1999

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

=========================
  PostDoctoral Position
=========================

POSTDOCTORAL POSITION in Molecular Biology of Cell Differentiation in 
Dictyostelium  at Virginia Tech University.  The project is funded by NSF 
and involves a phosphatase activity (5’NU)  that appears during the time 
course of cell differentiation in Dictyostelium.  The enzyme becomes 
restricted to a narrow band of cells forming the interface between the 
two differentiating cells types. We have two major goals: (1) to identify 
the role played by this gene in the regulation of morphogenesis by 
disruption of expression of the 5’NU gene, overexpression and ectopic 
expression.  The resulting effects on morphogenesis will be determined 
through the analysis of cell-type specific markers and genes that are 
indicative of the progression of differentiation in the two major cell 
types; (2) to identify the regulatory mechanisms that result in cell-
specific expression of the 5’NU gene. This will involve an analysis of 
the transcriptional regulation of the 5’NU gene, by identification of 
cis-acting factors that regulate the temporal and spatial expression, 
and identification, purification, and cloning of trans-acting factors 
that regulate expression of the gene.

Virginia Tech University is home to 25,000 students.  An interdepartmental 
program in Molecular and Cellular Biology offers a variety of opportunities 
for interaction with other laboratories on campus as well as participation 
in a number of semimar series in this research area.  The University campus 
in situated in the southwestern mountains of Virginia, an area known for 
its clean air and an abundance of outdoor activites.

For further information contact Dr. Charles L. Rutherford, 2119 Derring Hall, 
Virginia Tech University, Blacksburg, VA 24061; phone 540 231-5349; 
email rutherfo@vt.edu.



=============
  Abstracts
=============

A Potentially Exhaustive Screening Strategy Reveals Two Novel Divergent 
Myosins in Dictyostelium.

Eva C. Schwarz, Heidrun Geissler, and Thierry Soldati

Department of Molecular Cell Reserach, Max-Planck-Institut for Medical 
Research, Jahnstrasse 29, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics, in press

Abstract 

   In recent years, the myosin superfamily has kept expanding at an 
explosive rate, but the understanding of their complex functions 
has been lagging.  Therefore, Dictyostelium discoideum, a genetically 
and biochemically tractable eukaryotic amoeba, appears as a powerful 
model organism to investigate the involvement of the acto-myosin 
cytoskeleton in a variety of cellular tasks. Due to the relatively 
high degree of functional redundancy, such studies would be greatly 
facilitated by the prior knowledge of the whole myosin repertoire 
in this organism. Here, we present a strategy based on PCR 
amplification using degenerate primers and followed by negative 
hybridization screening which led to the potentially exhaustive 
identification of members of the myosin family in D. discoideum. 
Two novel myosins were identified and their genetic loci mapped 
by hybridization to an ordered YAC library. Preliminary inspection 
of myoK and myoM sequences revealed that, despite carrying most 
of the hallmarks of myosin motors, both molecules harbor features 
surprisingly divergent from most known myosins.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Phosphofructokinase from Dictyostelium discoideum is a potent 
inhibitor of tubulin polymerization

Ferenc Orosz§, Belén Santamaría||, Judit Ovádi§, and Juan J. Aragón*,||

Departamento de Bioquimica UAM and Instituto de Investigaciones
Biomédicas CSIC, Facultad de Medicina de la Universidad Autónoma de 
Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
§Institute of Enzymology, Biological Research Center, Hungarian Academy of
Sciences, Budapest, Hungary

Biochemistry, in press.

Abstract

   We identified the non-allosteric phosphofructokinase from the slime
mold Dictyostelium discoideum as a potent protein factor that inhibits the
rate of polymerization of tubulin at a molar ratio of 1 molecule to about
300 tubulin dimers for half-maximal action (IC50 = 32 nM). This effect was
(i) assessed by turbidity measurements, pelleting of microtubules and 
electron microscopy, (ii) observed when tubulin assembly was induced by 
taxol as well as by GTP in the presence of microtubule associated proteins 
or glutamate, and (iii) specific as it was not produced by the 
phosphofructokinase from rabbit muscle. Also in contrast to the latter, 
neither tubulin nor microtubules modified the catalytic activity of the 
slime mold isozyme. Immunoelectron microscopy provided further evidence 
that D. discoideum phosphofructokinase physically interacts with tubulin 
leading to the formation of aggregates. The process seems to be reversible 
since microtubules eventually formed in the presence of the inhibitor with 
concomitant reduction of tubulin aggregates. Limited proteolysis by 
subtilisin showed that the hypervariable C-termini of tubulin is not 
involved in the interaction with the enzyme. The possible physiological 
relevance of this novel function of D. discoideum phosphofructokinase 
different from its glycolytic action is discussed.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Differences in the ionic interaction of actin with the motor domains of
non-muscle and muscle myosin II

Juliette Van Dijk*, Marcus Furch, Jean Derancourt*, Renu Batra, Menno L.W.
Knetsch, Dietmar J. Manstein  & Patrick Chaussepied*

*UPR 1086 du CNRS, IFR 24, 1919 route de Mende, 34293 Montpellier Cedex5, 
France and Max-Planck-Institut für Medizinische Forschung, Jahnstr. 29, 
D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Europ. J. Biochem., im press.

Abstract

   Changes in the actin-myosin interface are thought to play an important 
role in microfilament-linked cellular movements. In this study, we compared 
the actin binding properties of the motor domain of Dictyostelium discoideum 
(M765) and rabbit skeletal muscle myosin subfragment-1 (S1). The Dictyostelium 
motor domain resembles S1(A2) (S1 carrying the A2 light chain) in its 
interaction with G-actin. Similar to S1(A2), none of the Dictyostelium 
motor domain constructs induced G-actin polymerization.  The affinity of 
monomeric actin (G-actin) was 20-fold lower for M765 than for S1(A2) but 
increasing the number of positive charges in the loop 2 region of the D. 
discoideum motor domain (residues 613-623) resulted in equivalent affinities 
of G-actin for M765 and for S1. Proteolytic cleavage and cross-linking 
approaches were used to show that M765, similar to S1, interacts via the 
loop 2 region with filamentous actin (F-actin). For both types of myosin, 
F-actin prevents trypsin cleavage in the loop 2 region and F-actin segment 
1-28 can be cross-linked to loop 2 residues by a carbodiimide-induced 
reaction. In contrast to S1, loop 559-565 of D.  discoideum myosin was 
not cross-linked to F-actin, probably due to the lower number of positive 
charges. These results confirm the importance of the loop 2 region of 
myosin for the interaction with both G-actin and F-actin, regardless 
of the source of myosin. The observed differences in the way in which 
M765 and S1 interact with actin may be linked to more general differences 
in the structure of the actomyosin-interface of muscle and non-muscle myosins.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Architectural Dynamics and Gene Replacement of Coronin Suggest its Role 
in Cytokinesis

Yoshio Fukui *1), Sarah Engler *2), Shinya Inoué *3), and Eugenio L. 
de Hostos *2)

*1) Cell and Molecular Biology, Northwestern University Medical School, 
Chicago, Illinois 60611,
*2) Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005,
(Current Address of E. L. de Hostos) Tropical Disease Research Unit, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA 94121
*3) Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, Massachusetts 02543.

Cell Motility and Cytoskeleton, in press.

Abstract

   Coronin is a ubiquitous actin-binding protein representing a member of 
proteins portraying a WD-repeat sequence, including the b-subunits of 
trimeric G-proteins.  Coronin has been suggested to participate in multiple, 
actin-based physiological activities such as cell movement and cell division.  
Although, the slow growth of coronin deletion mutants has been attributed to 
a defect in the fluid-phase uptake of nutrients, the exact role of coronin 
in cytoskeletal organization has not been elucidated.  In this study, we 
examined a role of coronin in cytokinesis by analyzing the effect of coronin 
deletion on the actin cytoskeleton and its dynamic distribution using a 
green fluorescent protein (GFP)-coronin fusion protein.  We show that GFP-
coronin works similarly to natural coronin in vivo and in vitro.  In live 
cells, GFP-coronin was found to accumulate into the cleavage furrow during 
cytokinesis.  The fluorescence pattern suggests its association to the 
contractile ring throughout cytokinesis.  Interestingly, a substantial 
amount of coronin was also bound to F-actin at the prospective posterior 
cortex of the daughter cells.  We also show that the coronin null cells 
reveal irregularities in organization of actin and myosin II and divide 
by a process identical to the traction-mediated cytofission reported in 
myosin II mutants.  Overall, this study suggests that coronin is essential 
for organizing the normal actin cytoskeleton and plays a significant role 
in cell division.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 12, number 1]

  