Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 12, number 8
April 17, 1999

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"


==============
  Abstracts
==============

Folic acid stimulation of the G(alpha)4 G protein-mediated signal transduction
pathway inhibits anterior prestalk cell development in Dictyostelium

Jeffrey A. Hadwiger and Jaishree Srinivasan

Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Oklahoma State University
Stillwater, OK 74078-3020

Differentiation (in press)

ABSTRACT

   In Dictyostelium discoideum, several G proteins are known to mediate the 
transduction of signals that direct chemotactic movement and regulate 
developmental morphogenesis.  The G protein alpha subunit encoded by the 
G(alpha)4 gene has been previously shown to be required for chemotactic 
responses to folic acid, proper developmental morphogenesis, and spore 
production.  In this study, cells overexpressing the wild type G(alpha)4 
gene, due to high copy gene dosage (G(alpha)4HC), were found to be defective 
in the ability to form the anterior prestalk cell region, express prespore- 
and prestalk-cell specific genes, and undergo spore formation.  In chimeric 
organisms, G(alpha)4HC prespore cell-specific gene expression and spore 
production were rescued by the presence of wild type cells, indicating that 
prespore cell development in G(alpha)4HC cells is limited by the absence of 
an intercellular signal.  Transplanted wild type tips were sufficient to 
rescue the G(alpha)4HC prespore cell development suggesting that the rescuing 
signal originates from the anterior prestalk cells.  However, the deficiencies 
in prestalk-specific gene expression were not rescued in the chimeric organisms.  
Furthermore, G(alpha)4HC cells were localized to the prespore region of these 
chimeric organisms and completely excluded from the anterior prestalk region, 
suggesting that the G(alpha)4 subunit functions cell autonomously to prevent 
anterior prestalk cell development.  The presence of exogenous folic acid during 
vegetative growth and development delayed anterior prestalk cell development in 
wild type but not g(alpha)4 null mutant aggregates, indicating that folic acid 
can inhibit cell type-specific differentiation by stimulating of the G(alpha)4-
mediated signal transduction pathway. The results of this study suggest that 
G(alpha)4-mediated signals can regulate cell type-specific differentiation by 
promoting prespore cell development and inhibiting anterior prestalk cell 
development.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Polycistronic transcription and editing of the mitochondrial small subunit 
(SSU) ribosomal RNA in Dictyostelium discoideum.

C. Barth, U. Greferath, M. Kotsifas and P.R. Fisher.

Microbiology Dept., La Trobe University, Melbourne, Australia.

Current Genetics. In Press.

Summary:

   Northern analyses and reverse transcription-polymerase chain-reaction 
(RT-PCR) experiments were performed on total RNA of Dictyostelium discoideum. 
The mitochondrial genes encoding the small subunit ribosomal RNA (SSU), 
cytochrome b (CYTB) and subunit 3 of the NADH dehydrogenase (ND3) were found 
to be cotranscribed. Further posttranscriptional processing resulted in a 
dicistronic transcript for CYTB and ND3, and a monocistronic SSU transcript. 
Markedly higher steady state transcript levels were detected for the mature 
SSU ribosomal RNA. A comparison of the SSU cDNA sequence with the mitochondrial 
DNA sequence of the SSU gene revealed C-to-U substitutional editing of the SSU 
ribosomal RNA at a single site, as a consequence of which the cDNA contained a 
PvuII site not present in the genomic DNA. The editing was shown to be highly 
efficient and to occur in the primary transcript before the release of the mature 
mRNA, rRNA and tRNAs. It is suggested that the editing may be required for 
normal pseudoknot formation in the 530 loop of the RNA and thus important 
for efficient, accurate translation in the mitochondria.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Molecular Basis of Localized Responses During Chemotaxis in Amoebae and
Leukocytes

Saskia van Es and Peter N. Devreotes
Department of Biological Chemistry, The Johns Hopkins University, School of

Medicine, Baltimore Maryland 21205

Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences, in press

Abstract

   Chemotaxis and phagocytosis are fundamental responses shared by many 
eukaryotic cells.  In chemotaxis, motile cells sense and respond directionally 
to chemical gradients; in phagocytosis, they bind and engulf foreign organisms 
and debris.  Both processes are central to the inflammatory responses mounted 
by leukocytes and are displayed by cells of the primitive immune systems of 
sponges, nematodes and flies.  Moreover, free-living amoebae display both 
chemotaxis and phagocytosis.  One such amoeba, Dictyostelium discoideum, 
provides a powerful system for molecular genetic analysis of these processes.  
In this review, we will describe the general features of chemotaxis shared 
by amoebae and leukocytes.  We will not focus on motility per se, since this 
subject has been extensively reviewed and, although motility and chemotaxis 
are related, these phenomena can be separated.  We will outline the genetic 
and biochemical tools available in D. discoideum to study chemotaxis and 
update our current understanding.  Finally, we will discuss the relationship 
between phagocytosis and chemotaxis. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The crystal structure of the Physarum polycephalum actin-fragmin kinase: an
atypical protein kinase with a specialised substrate binding domain

Stefan Steinbacher1, Peter Hof, Ludwig Eichinger2, Michael Schleicher2, Jan
Gettemans3, Joël Vandekerckhove3, Robert Huber and Jörg Benz4

Abteilung Strukturforschung, Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie, 82152 
Martinsried, Germany; 2) A.-Butenandt-Institut/Zellbiologie, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, 80336 München, Germany; 3) Flanders 
Interuniversity Institute of Biotechnology, University of Gent, 9000 Gent, 
Belgium; 4) Present address: Department für Chemie und Biochemie,
Universität Bern, 3012 Bern, Switzerland

EMBO J., in press

ABSTRACT

   Coordinated temporal and spatial regulation of the actin cytoskeleton 
is essential for diverse cellular processes such as cell division, cell 
motility and the formation and maintenance of specialised structures in 
differentiated cells. In plasmodia of Physarum polycephalum the F-actin 
capping activity of the actin-fragmin complex is regulated by phosphorylation 
of actin. This is mediated by a novel type of protein kinase with no sequence 
homology to eukaryotic-type protein kinases. Here we present the crystal 
structure of the catalytic domain of the first cloned actin kinase in complex 
with adenosine-monophosphate at 2.9 Å resolution. The three-dimensional 
fold reveals a catalytic module of approximately 160 residues, in common 
with the eukaryotic protein kinase super-family, which harbours the nucleotide 
binding site and the catalytic apparatus in an inter-lobe cleft. Several 
kinases that share this catalytic module differ in the overall  architecture 
of their substrate recognition domain. The actin-fragmin kinase has acquired 
a unique flat substrate recognition domain which is supposed to confer 
stringent substrate specificity. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 12, number 8]

  