Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 12, number 9
April 24, 1999

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"


==============
  Abstracts
==============

A Cell’s Sense of Direction

Dept. Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 
Baltimore MD  21205

C.A. Parent and P.N. Devreotes

Science, In press.

   In eukaryotic cells directional sensing is mediated by heterotrimeric 
guanine nucleotide binding protein (G protein)-linked signaling pathways.  
In D. discoideum amoebae and mammalian leukocytes, the receptors and 
G-protein subunits are uniformly distributed around the cell perimeter.  
Chemoattractants induce the transient appearance of binding sites for 
several pleckstrin homology domain-containing proteins on the inner face 
of the membrane. In gradients of attractant these sites are persistently 
present on the side of the cell facing the higher concentration, even in 
the absence of a functional actin cytoskeleton or cell movement. Thus, the 
cell senses direction by spatially regulating the activity of the signal 
transducution pathway.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Green fluorescent protein in the visualization of particle uptake and 
fluid-phase endocytosis. 

Markus Maniak

was: Max-Planck-Institut fuer Biochemie, Martinsried, Germany
now: MRC-Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, London, England

Meth. Enzymol. 302 March 1999.

There is no abstract or summary to this contribution. The chapter mainly 
describes details how we image endocytosis in Dictyostelium using GFP 
fusion-proteins.  For those who may be interested, there is a colour 
figure that uses the combination of FITC and TRITC dextrans to visualise 
the acidification of individual macropinosomes after internalisation. 
The result is, that the pH inside a macropinosome does not change over 
the first 40 seconds after its formation (when it is still thought to 
be surrounded by a dense cytoskeletal coat) then it becomes acidic within 
less than 10 seconds.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

SDF-2 induction of terminal differentiation in Dictyostelium
is mediated by the membrane-spanning sensor kinase DhkA

Nancy Wang, Fredrik Söderbom, Christophe Anjard, Gad Shaulsky
and William F. Loomis

Center for Molecular Genetics, Department of Biology

University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093

Molecular and Cellular Biology (in press)

Abstract

   SDF-2 is a peptide released by prestalk cells during culmination that 
stimulates prespore cells to encapsulate.  Genetic evidence indicates that 
the response is dependent on the dhkA gene. This gene encodes a member of 
the histidine kinase family of genes that functions in two-component signal 
transduction pathways.  The sequence of the N-terminal half of DhkA predicts 
two hydrophobic domains separated by a 310 amino acid loop that could bind a 
ligand.  By inserting MYC6 epitopes into DhkA we were able to show that the 
loop is extracellular while the catalytic domain is cytoplasmic. Cells 
expressing the MYC epitope in the extracellular domain of DhkA were found 
to respond only if induced with 100 fold higher levels of SDF-2 than required 
to induce dhkA+ cells; however, they could be induced to sporulate by addition 
of antibodies specific to the MYC epitope.  To examine the enzymatic activity 
of DhkA we purified the catalytic domain following expression in bacteria and 
observed incorporation of labelled phosphate from ATP consistent with histidine 
autophosphorylation.  Site-directed mutagenesis of histidine1395 to glutamine 
in the catalytic domain blocked autophosphorylation.  Furthermore, genetic 
analyses showed that histidine1395 and the relay aspartate2075 of DhkA are 
both critical to its function but that another histidine kinase, DhkB, can 
partially compensate for the lack of DhkA activity. Sporulation is drastically 
reduced in double mutants lacking both DhkA and DhkB. Suppressor studies indicate 
that the cAMP phosphodiesterase, RegA, and the cAMP dependent protein kinase, 
PKA, act downstream of DhkA.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 12, number 9]

  