Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 17, number 10
October 27, 2001

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at DictyBase--http://dictybase.org.

=============
  Abstracts
=============

The NF-kB like DNA binding activity observed in Dictyostelium nuclear 
extracts is due to the GBF transcription factor

Franois TRAINCARD 1, Eleonora PONTE 1, Jason PUN 2, Barrie COUKELL 2 and 
Michel VERON 1

1: Unit de Rgulation enzymatique des Activits cellulaires, CNRS FRE 2364, 
Institut Pasteur, 25 rue du Dr. Roux, 75724, Paris Cedex 15, France.
2: York University, 4700 Keele St., Toronto, Ontario, M3J 1P3, Canada.

Accepted in Journal of Cell Science

We have previously reported that a NF-kB transduction pathway was likely 
to be present in the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum 
(Traincard, F., Ponte, E., Pun, J., Coukell, B. and Vron, M., 1999, 
J. Cell Science, 112, 3529-3535). This conclusion was based on several 
observations, including the detection of developmentally regulated DNA 
binding proteins in Dictyostelium nuclear extracts, which bound to bona 
fide kB sequences. We have now performed additional experiments that 
demonstrate that the protein responsible for this NF-kB like DNA binding 
activity is the Dictyostelium GBF (G box regulatory element Binding Factor) 
transcription factor. This result, along with the fact that no sequence with 
significant similarity to components of the mammalian NF-kB pathway can be 
found in Dictyostelium genome, now almost entirely sequenced, led us to 
reconsider our previous conclusion on the occurrence of a NF-kB signal 
transduction pathway in Dictyostelium.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

GTP[gamma]S regulation of a twelve transmembrane guanylyl 
cyclase is retained after mutation to an adenylyl cyclase 

Jeroen Roelofs, Harrit M. Loovers and Peter J.M. Van 
Haastert

Department of Biochemistry, University of Groningen, 
Nijenborgh 4,9747AG Groningen, the Netherlands

J. Biol. Chem., in press

ABSTRACT

DdGCA is a Dictyostelium guanylyl cyclase with a topology 
typical for mammalian adenylyl cyclases containing twelve 
transmembrane spanning regions and two cyclase domain. In 
Dictyostelium cells heterotrimeric G-proteins are essential for 
guanylyl cyclase activation by extra-cellular cAMP. In lysates, 
guanylyl cyclase activity is strongly stimulated by GTPgS, which 
is also a substrate of the enzyme. DdGCA was converted to an 
adenylyl cyclase by introducing three point mutations. 
Expression of the obtained DdGCAkqd in adenylyl cyclase 
defective cells restored the phenotype of the mutant. GTPgS 
stimulated the adenylyl cyclase activity of DdGCAkqd with similar 
properties as the wildtype enzyme (decrease of Km and increase 
of Vmax). This demonstrates that GTPgS-stimulation is 
independent of substrate specificity. Furthermore, GTPgS- activation 
of DdGCAkqd is retained in several null mutants of Ga 
and Gb proteins, indicating that GTPgS-activation is not 
mediated by a heterotrimeric G-protein, but possibly by a 
monomeric G-protein. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Single molecule analysis of chemotactic signaling in Dictyostelium cells 

Masahiro Ueda, Yasushi Sako, Toshiki Tanaka, Peter Devreotes & Toshio 
Yanagida 

Science 294, 864-867. 

Single-molecule imaging techniques were used to reveal the binding of 
individual cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate molecules to heterotrimeric 
guanine nucleotide-binding protein coupled receptors on the surface of 
living Dictyostelium cells. The binding sites were uniformly distributed 
and diffused rapidly in the plane of the membrane. The probabilities of 
individual association and dissociation events were greater for receptors 
at the anterior end of the cell. Agonist-induced receptor phosphorylation 
had little effect on any of the monitored properties, whereas G-protein 
coupling influenced the binding kinetics. These observations illustrate 
the dynamic properties of receptors involved in gradient sensing and 
suggest that these may be polarized in chemotactic cells. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Calreticulin and Calnexin in the Endoplasmic Reticulum Are Important for 
Phagocytosis 

Annette Mueller-Taubenberger*, Andrei N. Lupas, Hewang Li*, Mary Ecke*, 
Evelyn Simmeth*, and Guenther Gerisch*

*  Max-Planck-Institut fuer Biochemie, Martinsried, Germany
  SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals UP1345, Collegeville, PA, USA

EMBO Journal, in press.

Abstract

Calreticulin and calnexin are Ca2+-binding proteins with chaperone activity 
in the endoplasmic reticulum. These proteins have been eliminated by gene 
replacement in Dictyostelium, the only microorganism known to harbor both 
proteins; family members in Dictyostelium are located at the base of 
phylogenetic trees. In double mutants lacking calreticulin and calnexin 
a dramatic decline in the rate of phagocytosis was observed, whereas only 
mild changes occurred in single mutants. Dictyostelium cells are 
professional phagocytes, capable of internalizing particles by a sequence 
of activities: adhesion of the particle to the cell surface, actin-
dependent outgrowth of a phagocytic cup, and separation of the phagosome 
from the plasma membrane. In the double-null mutants, particles still 
adhered to the cell surface, but the outgrowth of phagocytic cups was 
compromised. GFP-tagged calreticulin and calnexin, expressed in wild type 
cells, revealed a direct link of the ER to the phagocytic cup enclosing a 
particle, such that the Ca2+-storage capacity of calreticulin and calnexin 
might directly modulate activities of the actin system during particle 
uptake.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 17, number 10]
