Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 17, number 12
November 17, 2001

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at DictyBase--http://dictybase.org.


=============
  Abstracts
=============

CREATION OF AN ALLOSTERIC PHOSPHOFRUCTOKINASE STARTING WITH A NONALLOSTERIC 
ENZYME: THE CASE OF DICTYOSTELIUM DISCOIDEUM PHOSPHOFRUCTOKINASE

Beln Santamara, Antonio M. Estvez, Oscar H. Martnez-Costa and Juan 
J. Aragn

Departamento de Bioqumica and Instituto de Investigaciones Biomdicas 
Alberto Sols UAM-CSIC, Facultad de Medicina de la Universidad Autnoma, 
28029 Madrid, Spain

J. Biol. Chem., accepted for publication, available on line at www.jbc.org

Abstract

An allosteric phosphofructokinase (PFK) was created by sequence manipulation 
of the nonallosteric enzyme from the slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum 
(DdPFK). Most amino acid residues proposed as important for catalytic and 
allosteric sites are conserved in DdPFK except for a few of them, and their 
reversion did not modify its kinetic behavior. However, deletions at the 
unique C-terminal extension of this PFK produced a markedly allosteric 
enzyme. Thus, a mutant lacking the last 26 C-terminal residues exhibited 
hysteresis in the time course, intense cooperativity (nH = 3.8) and a 
200-fold decrease in the apparent affinity for fructose 6-phosphate 
(S0.5 = 4500 mM), strong activation by fructose 2,6-bisphosphate 
(Kact = 0.1 mM) and fructose 1,6-bisphosphate (Kact = 40 mM), dependence 
on enzyme concentration, proton inhibition and subunit association-
dissociation in response to fructose 6-phosphate, versus the nonhysteretic 
and hyperbolic wild-type enzyme (nH = 1.0; Km = 22 mM) that remained as a 
stable tetramer. Systematic deletions and point mutations at the C-tail 
region of DdPFK identified the last C-terminal residue, Leu834, as critical 
to produce a nonallosteric enzyme. All allosteric mutants were practically 
insensitive to MgATP inhibition, suggesting that this effect does not 
involve the same allosteric transition as that responsible for fructose 
6-phosphate cooperativity and fructose bisphosphate activation.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Dictyostelium LvsA Protein is Localized on the Contractile Vacuole 
and is Required for Osmoregulation.

Noel J. Gerald, Michael Siano and Arturo De Lozanne

Section of Molecular Cell & Developmental Biology
and Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology,
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712.

Accepted into Traffic

LvsA is a Dictyostelium protein that is essential for cytokinesis and that 
is related to the mammalian beige/LYST family of proteins.  To better 
understand the function of this novel protein family we tagged LvsA with 
GFP using recombination techniques.  GFP-LvsA is primarily associated with 
the membranes of the contractile vacuole (CV) system and it also has a 
punctate distribution in the cytoplasm.  Two markers of the Dictyostelium 
CV, the vacuolar proton pump and calmodulin, show extensive colocalization 
with GFP-LvsA on CV membranes.  Interestingly, the association of lvsA with 
CV membranes occurs only during the discharge phase of the vacuole.  In 
LvsA mutants the CV becomes disorganized and calmodulin dissociates from 
the CV membranes.  Consequently, the CV is unable to function normally, it 
can swell but seems unable to discharge and the LvsA mutants become 
osmosensitive.  These results demonstrate that LvsA can associate 
transiently with the CV membrane compartment and that this association 
is necessary for the function of the CV during osmoregulation.  This 
transient association with specific membrane compartments may be a general 
property of other BEACH-domain containing proteins.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

PCR-mediated generation of a gene disruption construct without the use of 
DNA ligase and plasmid vectors

Hidekazu Kuwayama, Shinji Obara, Takahiro Morio, Mariko Katoh, Hideko 
Urushihara and Yoshimasa Tanaka

Institute of Biological Sciences,0University of Tsukuba,0Tsukuba, Ibaraki 
305-8572, Japan.

Nucleic Acid Research, in press

Abstract

We introduce a PCR-based procedure for generating a gene disruption 
construct. This method depends on DNA fragment fusion by PCR technique 
and requires only two steps of PCR to obtain a sufficient amount of the 
gene disruption construct for one transformation experiment. The first 
step involves three separate PCR syntheses of a selectable marker cassette 
and the 5'- and 3'- regions of a target gene. Of the four primers used in 
the amplification of the 5 - and 3 -regions of the target gene, two primers 
placed proximal to the site of the marker cassette are designed to have 
sequence tags complementary to the 5 - or 3 - side of the marker cassette. 
The two primers used in the PCR synthesis of the marker cassette are 
complementary to the tagged primers. By fusion PCR, the 5 - and 3 - PCR 
products are linked to the marker cassette via the regions of tagged 
primers which overlap. A sufficient amount of the disruption construct 
can be directly amplified with the outermost primers. This method is 
simple, rapid, and relatively inexpensive. In addition, there is the 
freedom of attaching long flanking regions with any selectable marker 
cassette.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dictyostelium LvsB Mutants Model the Lysosomal Defects Associated with 
Chediak-Higashi Syndrome

Edward Harris1, Ning Wang2, Wei-l Wu2, Alisha Weatherford1, Arturo 
De Lozanne2, and James Cardelli1*

1Department of Microbiology and Immunology, LSU Health Sciences Center, 
Shreveport, LA 71130
2Department of Molecular Cell and Developmental Biology and Institute for 
Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712

Accepted Molecular Biology of the Cell

ABSTRACT
   
    Chediak-Higashi Syndrome (CHS) is a genetic disorder caused by mutations 
in a gene encoding a protein named LYST in humans (Lysosomal-Trafficking 
Regulator) or Beige in mice.  A prominent feature of this disease is the 
accumulation of enlarged lysosome-related granules in a variety of cells. 
The genome of D. discoideum contains 6 genes encoding proteins that are 
related to LYST/Beige in amino acid sequence, and disruption of one of these 
genes, lvsA (large volume sphere), results in profound defects in cytokinesis. 
To better understand the function of this family of proteins in membrane 
trafficking, we have analyzed mutants disrupted in lvsA, lvsB, lvsC, lvsD, 
lvsE and lvsF.  Of all these, only lvsA and lvsB mutants displayed interesting 
phenotypes in our assays. LvsA-null cells exhibited defects in phagocytosis, 
and contained abnormal looking contractile vacuole membranes. Loss of LvsB, 
the Dictyostelium protein most similar to LYST/Beige, resulted in the formation 
of enlarged vesicles that by multiple criteria appeared to  be acidic 
lysosomes. The rates of endocytosis, phagocytosis and fluid phase exocytosis 
were normal in lvsB-null cells. Also, the rates of processing and the 
efficiency of targeting of lysosomal alpha-mannosidase were normal, although 
lvsB mutants inefficiently retained alpha-mannosidase, as well as two other
lysosomal cysteine proteinases. Finally, results of pulse-chase experiments 
indicated that an increase in fusion rates accounted for the enlarged 
lysosomes in lvsB-null cells, suggesting LvsB acts as a negative regulator 
of fusion. Our results support the notion that LvsB/LYST/Beige function in a 
similar manner to regulate lysosome biogenesis.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

On the Evolutionary Conservation of the Cell Death Pathway: Mitochondrial 
Release of an Apoptosis-inducing Factor during Dictyostelium discoideum Cell 
Death

Damien Arnoult,* Irene Tatischeff,  Jerome Estaquier,* Mathilde Girard,  
Franck Sureau,  Jean Pierre Tissier,  Alain Grodet,* Marc Dellinger, 
FranoisTraincard,  Axel Kahn,  Jean-Claude Ameisen,* and Patrice Xavier 
Petit #

Mol. Bio. Cell 12, 3016-3030 

Mitochondria play a pivotal role in apoptosis in multicellular organisms by 
releasing apoptogenic factors such as cytochrome c that activate the 
caspases effector pathway, and apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) that is 
involved in a caspase-independent cell death pathway. Here we report that 
cell death in the single-celled organism Dictyostelium discoideum involves 
early disruption of mito-chondrialtransmembrane potential (DYm) that 
precedes the induction of several apoptosis-likefeatures, including exposure 
of the phosphatidyl residues at the external surface of the plasmamembrane, 
an intense vacuolization, a fragmentation of DNA into large fragments, an 
autophagy,and the release of apoptotic corpses that are engulfed by 
neighboring cells. We have cloned a Dictyostelium homolog of mammalian AIF 
that is localized into mitochondria and is translocated from the 
mitochondria to the cytoplasm and the nucleus after the onset of cell 
death. Cytoplasmic extracts from dying Dictyostelium cells trigger the 
breakdown of isolated mammalian and Dictyo-stelium nuclei in a cell-free 
system, and this process is inhibited by a polyclonal antibody specific 
for Dictyostelium discoideum apoptosis-inducing factor (DdAIF), suggesting 
that DdAIF is involved in DNA degradation during Dictyostelium cell death. 
Our findings indicate that the cell death pathway in Dictyostelium involves 
mitochondria and an AIF homolog, suggesting the evolutionary conservation 
of at least part of the cell death pathway in unicellular and multicellular 
organisms.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 17, number 12]
