Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 17, number 6
Sept. 22, 2001

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at DictyBase--http://dictybase.org.

==============
  Abstracts
==============

Regulated Expression of Myosin II Heavy Chain and RacB Using an Inducible 
tRNA Suppressor Gene

Ka Ming Pang1,3 Theodore Dingermann2, and  David A. Knecht1*.

 1 Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut
Storrs, Connecticut 06269 USA.

2.Institut fur Pharmazeutische Biologie  Johann Wolfgang Goethe 
Universitat Frankfurt, Germany.

Accepted: Gene

Abstract

An inducible expression system that indirectly regulates gene expression 
through the use of an inducible suppressor tRNA has been used to express 
both endogenous and exogenous genes in Dictyostelium.  The tetracycline 
repressor and tRNA suppressor (Glu) are expressed from a single G418 
selectable vector, while a gene engineered to contain a stop codon is 
expressed from a separate hygromycin selectable vector.  b-galactosidase 
could be induced over 300 fold with this system, and the extent of induction 
could be varied depending upon the amount of tetracycline added.  It took 3 
days to fully induce expression, and about 3 days for expression to decrease 
to baseline after removal of the tetracycline.  Dictyostelium myosin II 
heavy chain could also be expressed in an inducible manner, although the 
induction ratio was not as high as b-galactosidase and the maximum 
expression level was not as high as wild-type levels.  A significant 
accumulation of the truncated peptide indicates that complete suppression 
of the stop codon was not achieved.  Partial phenotypic reversion was 
observed in null mutants inducibly expressing myosin II.  RacB could also 
be inducibly expressed, whereas the protein could not be expressed from a 
constitutive promoter, presumably because expression at high levels is 
lethal.  Therefore, the inducible tRNA system can be used to control 
expression of endogenous Dictyostelium genes.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Altered Cell-Type Proportioning in Dictyostelium Lacking Adenosine 
Monophosphate Deaminase

Soo-Cheon Chae, Danny Fuller and William F. Loomis*

Center for Molecular Genetics, Division of Biology
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093

accepted: Developmental Biology

Abstract

The proportions of prespore and prestalk cells in Dictyostelium discoideum 
are regulated such that they are size invariant and can adjust when the ratio 
is perturbed. We have found that disruption of a gene, amdA, that encodes 
AMP deaminase results in a significantly increased proportion of prestalk 
cells. Strains lacking AMP deaminase form short, thick stalks and glassy 
sori with less than 5% the normal number of spores. The levels of prestalk-
specific mRNAs in amdA- cells are more than twice as high as in wild type 
strains and prespore specific mRNAs are reduced. Using an ecmA::lacZ 
construct to mark prestalk cells, we found that amdA- null slugs have twice 
the normal number of prestalk cells. The number of cells expressing an 
ecmO::lacZ construct was not affected by loss of AmdA indicating that the 
mutation results in an increase in PST-A prestalk cells rather than PST-O 
cells. This alteration in cell-type proportioning is a cell autonomous 
consequence of the loss of AMP deaminase since mutant cells developed 
together with wild type cells still produced excess prestalk cells and 
wild type cells carrying the ecmA::lacZ construct formed normal numbers 
of prestalk cells when developed together with an equal number of
amdA- mutant cells.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 17, number 6]
