dictyNews
Electronic Edition
Volume 36, number 3
Jan 28, 2011

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu
or by using the form at
http://dictybase.org/db/cgi-bin/dictyBase/abstract_submit.

Back issues of dictyNews, the Dicty Reference database and other
useful information is available at dictyBase - http://dictybase.org.

Follow dictyBase on twitter:
http://twitter.com/dictybase


=========
Abstracts
=========


Bio-electrospraying and aerodynamically assisted bio-jetting the model 
eukaryotic Dictyostelium discoideum: assessing stress and developmental 
competency post-treatment

Nicholl K. Pakes, Suwan N. Jayasinghe and Robin S. B. Williams


Journal of the Royal Society Interface, in press

Bio-electrospraying (BES) and aerodynamically assisted bio-jetting (AABJ) 
have recently been established as important novel biospray technologies 
for directly manipulating living cells. To elucidate their potential in medical 
and clinical sciences, these bio-aerosol techniques have been subjected 
to increasingly rigorous investigations. In parallel to these studies, we wish 
to introduce these unique biotechnologies for use in the basic biological 
sciences, for handling a wide range of cell types and systems, thus 
increasing the range and the scope of these techniques for modern 
research. Here, the authors present the analysis of the new use of these 
biospray techniques for the direct handling of the simple eukaryotic 
biomedical model organism Dictyostelium discoideum. These cells are 
widely used as a model for immune cell chemotaxis and as a simple 
model for development. We demonstrate that AABJ of these cells did not 
cause cell stress, as defined by the stress-gene induction, nor affect cell 
development. Furthermore, although BES induced the increased 
expression of one stress-related gene (gapA), this was not a generalized 
stress response nor did it affect cell development. These data suggest 
that these biospray techniques can be used to directly manipulate single 
cells of this biomedical model without inducing a generalized stress 
response or perturbing later development.


Submitted by Robin Williams [Robin.williams@rhul.ac.uk]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


eIF2alpha Kinases Control Chalone Production In Dictyostelium 
discoideum

Robert L. Bowman*, Yanhua Xiong, Janet H. Kirsten and 
Charles K. Singleton

Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, 
VU Station B 351634, Nashville, TN 37235


Eukaryotic Cell, in press

Growing Dictyostelium cells secrete CfaD and AprA, two proteins that 
have been characterized as chalones.  They exist within a high molecular
weight complex that reversibly inhibits cell proliferation but not growth via 
cell surface receptors and a signaling pathway that includes G proteins.  
How the production of these two proteins is regulated is unknown.  
Dictyostelium cells possess three GCN2 type eIF2alpha kinases, proteins 
that phosphorylate the translational initiation factor eIF2alpha and possess 
a tRNA binding domain involved in their regulation.  The Dictyostelium 
kinases have been shown to function during development in regulating 
several processes.  We show here that expression of an unregulated, 
activated kinase domain greatly inhibits cell proliferation.  The inhibitory 
effect on proliferation is not due to a general inhibition of translation. 
Instead it is due to an enhanced production of a secreted factor(s).  
Indeed, extracellular CfaD and AprA proteins, but not their mRNAs, are 
overproduced in cells expressing the activated kinase domain.  The 
inhibition of proliferation is not seen when the activated kinase domain 
is expressed in cells lacking CfaD or AprA or in cells that contain a non-
phosphorylatable eIF2alpha.  We conclude that production of the chalones 
CfaD and AprA is translationally regulated by eIF2alpha phosphorylation. 
Both proteins are upregulated during culmination of development, and 
this enhanced production is lacking in a strain that possesses a non-
phosphorylatable eIF2alpha.


Submitted by Charles Singleton [charles.k.singleton@Vanderbilt.Edu]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Atg1 allows second-signalled autophagic cell death in Dictyostelium

Marie-Françoise Luciani,1,2,3 Corinne Giusti,1,2,3 Birthe Harms,1,2,3 
Yoshiteru Oshima,4 Haruhisa Kikuchi,4  Yuzuru Kubohara,5  and 
Pierre Golstein1,2,3,*

1Centre d’Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy (CIML), Faculté des Sciences 
de Luminy, Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille F-13288, France; 
2INSERM U631, Marseille F-13288, France;  
3CNRS UMR6102, Marseille F-13288, France; 
4Laboratory of Natural Product Chemistry, Graduate School of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8578, Japan; 
5Institute for Molecular & Cellular Regulation, Gunma University, 
Maebashi 371-8512, Japan


Autophagy 2011, in press
 
We investigated the role of atg1 in autophagic cell death (ACD) in a 
Dictyostelium monolayer model. The model is especially propitious, not 
only because of genetic tractability and absence of apoptosis machinery, 
but also because induction of ACD requires two successive exogenous 
signals, first the combination of starvation and cAMP, second the 
differentiation factor DIF-1. This enables one to analyze separately 
first-signal-induced autophagy and subsequent second-signal-induced 
ACD. We used mutants of atg1, a gene that plays an essential role in 
the initiation of autophagy. Upon starvation/cAMP, in contrast to parental 
cells, atg1 mutant cells showed irreversible lesions, clearly establishing 
a protective role for atg1. Upon subsequent exposure to DIF-1 or to 
more ACD-specific second signals, starved parental cells progressed 
to ACD, but starved atg1 mutant cells did not, showing that atg1 was 
required for ACD. Thus, in the same cells atg1 was required in two 
apparently opposite ways, upon first-signalling for cell survival and upon
second-signalling for ACD. Our findings strongly suggest that atg1, thus 
presumably autophagy, protects the cells from starvation-induced cell 
death, allowing subsequent induction of ACD by the second signal. 
ACD is therefore not only "with" autophagy (since it showed signs of 
autophagy throughout), but is also "allowed by" autophagy. This does not 
exclude a role for autophagy also after second signalling. These results 
may account for discrepancies reported in the literature, encourage 
searches for second signals in different developmental models of 
ACD, and incite caution in autophagy-related therapeutic attempts.


Submitted by Pierre Golstein [golstein@ciml.univ-mrs.fr]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Origin and function of the stalk-cell vacuole in Dictyostelium

Toru Uchikawa(a), Akitsugu Yamamoto(b), Kei Inouye(a)

(a) Department of Botany, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University 
(b) Faculty of Bioscience, Nagahama Institute of Bio-Science and Technology


Dev. Biol., in press

Large vacuoles are characteristic of plant and fungal cells, and their origin 
has long attracted interest. The cellular slime mould provides a unique
opportunity to study the de novo formation of vacuoles because, in its life 
cycle, a subset of the highly motile animal-like cells (prestalk cells) rapidly 
develop a single large vacuole and cellulosic cell wall to become plant-like 
cells (stalk cells). Here we describe the origin and process of vacuole 
formation using live-imaging of Dictyostelium cells expressing GFP-tagged 
ammonium transporter A (AmtA-GFP), which was found to reside on the 
membrane of stalk-cell vacuoles. We show that stalk-cell vacuoles originate 
from acidic vesicles and autophagosomes, which fuse to form autolysosomes. 
Their repeated fusion and expansion accompanied by concomitant cell wall 
formation enables the stalk cells to rapidly develop turgor pressure necessary 
to make the rigid stalk to hold the spores aloft. Contractile vacuoles, which
are rich in H+-ATPase as in plant vacuoles, remained separate from these 
vacuoles. We further argue that AmtA may play an important role in the 
control of stalk-cell differentiation by modulating the pH of autolysosomes.


Submitted by Kei Inouye [inoue@cosmos.bot.kyoto-u.ac.jp]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Requirements for Skp1 processing by cytosolic prolyl 4(trans)-hydroxylase 
and alpha-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase enzymes involved in 
O2-signaling in Dictyostelium

Hanke van der Wel‡, Jennifer M. Johnson‡, Yuechi Xu‡, Chamini V. 
Karunaratne§, Kyle D. Wilson‡, Yusuf Vohra¶, Geert-Jan Boons¶, 
Carol M. Taylor§, Brad Bendiak#, and Christopher M. West‡

‡Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oklahoma Center 
for Medical Glycobiology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 
Oklahoma City, OK 73104  USA; 
§Department of Chemistry, 742 Choppin Hall, Louisiana State University, 
Baton Rouge, LA 70803  USA; 
¶Dept. of Chemistry and Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, 
315 Riverbend Road, University of Georgia, Athens, GA  30602  USA; 
#Department of Cell and Developmental Biology and Structural Biology 
and Biophysics Program, University of Colorado Denver, Anschutz 
Medical Campus, Mail Stop 8108, RC-1 South Bldg., L18-12120, 12801 
East 17th Avenue, Aurora, CO 80045  USA


Biochemistry, in press.

The social amoeba Dictyostelium expresses a hypoxia inducible factor-
alpha (HIFalpha)-type prolyl 4-hydroxylase (P4H1) and an 
alpha-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (Gnt1) that sequentially modify 
proline-143 of Skp1, a subunit of the SCF (Skp1/Cullin/F-box protein)-class 
of E3 ubiquitin-ligases. Prior genetic studies have implicated Skp1 and its 
modification by these enzymes in O2-regulation of development, suggesting 
the existence of an ancient O2-sensing mechanism related to modification of 
the transcription factor HIFalpha by animal prolyl 4-hydroxylases (PHDs). To 
better understand the role of Skp1 in P4H1-dependent O2-signaling, 
biochemical and biophysical studies were conducted to characterize the 
reaction product and the basis of Skp1 substrate selection by P4H1 and 
Gnt1. 1H-NMR demonstrated formation of 4(trans)-hydroxyproline as 
previously found for HIFalpha, and highly purified P4H1 was inhibited by 
Krebs cycleintermediates and other compounds that affect animal P4Hs. 
However, in contrast to hydroxylation of HIFalpha by PHDs, P4H1 
depended on features of full-length Skp1, based on truncation, mutagenesis, 
and competitive inhibition studies. These features are conserved during 
animal evolution, as even mammalian Skp1, which lacks the target proline, 
became a good substrate upon its restoration. P4H1 recognition may 
depend on features conserved for SCF complex formation as 
heterodimerization with an F-box protein blocked Skp1 hydroxylation. 
The hydroxyproline-capping enzyme Gnt1 exhibited similar requirements 
for Skp1 as a substrate. These and other findings support a model in
which the protist P4H1 conditionally hydroxylates Skp1 of 
E3SCFubiquitin-ligases to control half-lives of multiple targets, rather 
than the mechanism of animal PHDs where individual proteins are 
hydroxylated leading to ubiquitination by the evolutionarily-related 
E3VBCubiquitin-ligases. 


Submitted by: Chris West [Cwest2@ouhsc.edu]
==============================================================
[End dictyNews, volume 36, number 3]