Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 19, number 3
August 3, 2002

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at DictyBase--http://dictybase.org.

======================
  Position Available
======================

Postdoctoral position in the Wellcome Trust Biocentre at the University 
of Dundee


A postdoctoral position is available in Dr. Inke Nthke s laboratory to 
join a team studying the function of the Adenomatous Polyposis Coli tumour 
suppressor protein (APC).  The project will involve using Dictyostelium 
Discoideum to investigate the role of APC in cytoskeletal dynamics and 
organisation.  The general aim of work in the laboratory is to determine 
how the diverse functions of APC relate to its role in cancer and how these 
functions are co-ordinated and regulated.  Experimental approaches include 
general cell- and molecular biology techniques combined with high-resolution 
fluorescence microscopy and use of Dictyostelium as a model organism.  
The candidate will join a small, dynamic, highly interactive research team 
with active collaborations worldwide.

A proven research ability and motivation are required and experience in 
working with Dictyostelium is requisite.  Experience in general cell biology 
and molecular biology is essential.  The position is available immediately 
for 2 years in the first instance.  For informal enquiries, please contact 
Dr. Inke S. Nthke (+ 44 1382 345821; e-mail: i.s.nathke@dundee.ac.uk).  
Applications should be directed to: Janette Cordiner, School Administrator, 
School of Life Sciences, MSI/WTB Complex, University of Dundee, Dow Street, 
Dundee, DD1 5EH; j.m.cordiner@dundee.ac.uk.   Please cite reference  
SC/763/1 on the application.

The Wellcome Trust Biocentre is part of the internationally renowned WTB/MSI 
complex at the University of Dundee. The complex provides an extremely 
interactive research environment and houses nearly 400 research staff.  
Further information about research in the WTB/MSI complex can be obtained 
at http://www.dundee.ac.uk/biocentre/.


=============
  Abstracts
=============

Differential localization in cells of myosin II heavy chain kinases during 
cytokinesis and polarized migration.

Wenchuan Liang, Lucila Licate, Hans Warrick, James Spudich, and Thomas Egelhoff

BMC Cell Biology 2002 3: 19

Abstract

Background

Cortical myosin-II filaments in Dictyostelium discoideum display enrichment 
in the posterior of the cell during cell migration, and in the cleavage 
furrow during cytokinesis. Filament assembly in turn is regulated by 
phosphorylation in the tail region of the myosin heavy chain (MHC). Early 
studies have revealed one enzyme, MHCK-A, which participates in filament 
assembly control, and two other structurally related enzymes, MHCK-B and 
-C. In this report we evaluate the biochemical properties of MHCK-C, and 
using fluorescence microscopy in living cells we examine the localization 
of GFP-labeled MHCK-A, -B, and -C in relation to GFP-myosin-II localization. 

Results 

Biochemical analysis indicates that MHCK-C can phosphorylate MHC with 
concomitant disassembly of myosin II filaments. In living cells, GFP-MHCK-A 
displayed frequent enrichment in the anterior of polarized migrating cells, 
and in the polar region but not the furrow during cytokinesis. GFP-MHCK-B 
generally displayed a homogeneous distribution. In migrating cells 
GFP-MHCK-C displayed posterior enrichment similar to that of myosin II, but 
did not localize with myosin II to the furrow during the early stage of 
cytokinesis. At the late stage of cytokinesis, GFP-MHCK-C became strongly 
enriched in the cleavage furrow, remaining there through completion of 
division.

Conclusion

MHCK-A, -B, and -C display distinct cellular localization patterns 
suggesting different cellular functions and regulation for each MHCK 
isoform. The strong localization of MHCK-C to the cleavage furrow in the 
late stages of cell division may reflect a mechanism by which the cell 
regulates the progressive removal of myosin II as furrowing progresses.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

cAMP dependent protein kinase regulates Polysphondylium pallidum development

Satoru Funamoto1,3, Christophe Anjard2,4, Wolfgang Nellen2 and Hiroshi 
Ochiai1,5

1Division of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Hokkaido 
University, Sapporo 060-0810, Japan; 2Department of Genetics, University of 
Kassel, Heinrich-Plett-Str. 40 D-34132 Kassel, Germany; 3 Present address: 
Department of Neuropathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, 
Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan; 4Present address: Center for 
Molecular Genetics, Department of Biology University of California, San Diego 
9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0634

Author for correspondence. E-mail: hochiai@sci.hokudai.ac.jp

Differentiation, in press.

Abstract 

In eukaryotic cells the universal second messenger cAMP regulates various 
aspects of development and differentiation. The primary target for cAMP is 
the regulatory subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA), which, 
upon cAMP binding, dissociates from the catalytic subunit and thus activates 
it. In the soil amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum the function of PKA in 
growth, development and cell differentiation has been thoroughly 
investigated and substantial information is available. To obtain a more 
general view we investigated the influence of PKA on development of the 
related species Polysphondylium pallidum. Cells were transformed to 
overexpress either a dominant negative mutant of the regulatory subunit 
(Rm) from Dictyostelium that cannot bind cAMP, or the catalytic subunit 
(PKA-C) from Dictyostelium. Cells overexpressing Rm rarely aggregated and 
the few multicellular structures developed  slowly into very small fruiting 
bodies without branching of secondary sorogens, the prominent feature of 
Polysphondylium. Few round spores with reduced viability were formed. When 
mixed with wild type cells and allowed to develop, the Rm cells were 
randomly distributed in aggregation streams, but were later found in the 
posterior region of the culminating slug or were left behind on the surface 
of the substratum. The PKA-C overexpressing cells exhibited precocious 
development and formed more aggregates of smaller size. Moreover, 
expression of PKA-C under the control of the prestalk specific ecmB promoter 
of Dictyostelium, lead to protrusions from aggregation streams. We conclude 
that Dictyostelium PKA subunits introduced into Polysphondylium cells are 
functional as signal components, indicating that a biochemically similar 
PKA mechanism works in Polysphondylium.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Element analysis of the Polysphondylium pallidum gp64 promoter

Naohisa Takaokaa, Masashi Fukuzawab, Atsushi Katoa, Tamao Saitoa and Hiroshi 
Ochiaia, c

a. Division of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Hokkaido 
University, Sapporo, 060-0810 Japan; b. Wellcome Trust Building, Department 
of Anatomy and Physiology, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee, DD1 4HN, UK

Author for corresponding. E-mail: hochiai@sci.hokudai.ac.jp 

BBA, in press.

Abstract

gp64 mRNA in Polysphondylium pallidum is expressed extensively during 
vegetative growth, and begins to rapidly decrease at the onset of 
development. To examine this unique regulation, 5 deletion analysis of the 
gp64 promoter was undertaken, and two growth-phase activated elements have 
been found: a food-dependent, upstream regulatory region (FUR, -222 to 170) 
and a vegetatively activated, downstream region (VAD, -110 to 63). Here we 
concentrate our analysis on an A1 and A2 sequences in the FUR region: A1 
consists of a GATTTTTTTA sequence called a corresponding sequence and A2 
consists of the direct repeat TTTGTTGTG. The cells carrying a combined 
construct of A1 and A2 acted synergistically in a reporter activity. A 
point mutation analysis in A1 indicates that a G residue is required for 
the activation of A1. From analyses of promoter regulation in a liquid or 
a solid medium, the promoter activity of the cells fed on bacteria in 
A-medium (axenic medium for Polysphondylium) or grown in A-medium alone 
was only one-fourth of that of the cells fed on bacteria.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A novel Dictyostelium Cdk8 is required for aggregation, but dispensable for 
growth

Kosuke Takeda, Tamao Saito, Hiroshi Ochiai*
Division of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Hokkaido 
University Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-0810, Japan

Author for correspondence. E-mail: hochiai@sci.hokudai.ac.jp

Develop. Growth Differ., in  press

Abstract

When Dictyostelium cells starve, they express genes necessary for 
aggregation. Using insertional mutagenesis, we have isolated a mutant that
does not aggregate upon starvation and that forms small plaques on bacterial 
lawns, thus indicating slow growth. The sequencing of the mutated locus 
showed a strong similarity to the catalytic domain of cdc2-related kinase 
genes. Phylogenetic analysis further indicated that the amino acid sequence 
was more close to cyclin-dependent kinase 8 than to those of other cyclin-
dependent kinases. Thus we designated this gene as Ddcdk8. The Ddcdk8-null 
cells do not aggregate and grow somewhat more slowly than parental cells 
when being shaken in axenic medium or laid on bacterial plates. To confirm 
whether these defective phenotypes were caused by disruption of this gene, 
the Ddcdk8-null cells were complemented with DdCdk8 protein expressed from 
an endogenous promoter but not an actin promoter, and when the complemented 
cells were then allowed to grow on a bacterial lawn, they began to aggregate 
as the food supply was depleted, and finally became fruiting bodies. The 
results suggest that properly regulated DdCdk8 activity is essential for 
aggregation. Since when starved, Ddcdk8-null cells do not express at all 
the acaA transcripts required for aggregation, we deduce that Ddcdk8 is 
epistatic for acaA expression, indicating that the Ddcdk8 products may 
regulate expression of acaA and/or other genes.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Cell adhesion during the migratory slug stage of Dictyostelium discoideum.

*Vivienne M. Bowers-Morrow, *Sinan O. Ali, and +Keith L. Williams 

*Department of Biological Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, 2109 
AUSTRALIA 
+Proteome Systems Ltd, North Ryde, Sydney, NSW, 2113 AUSTRALIA 

All correspondence to Vivienne Bowers-Morrow, email: vmorrow@rna.bio.mq.edu.au 

CELL BIOLOGY INTERNATIONAL, in press

ABSTRACT

Prespore-specific Antigen (PsA) is selectively expressed on the surface of 
prespore cells at the multicellular migratory slug stage of Dictyostelium 
discoideum development. It is a developmentally regulated glycoprotein 
which is anchored to the cell membrane through a glycosyl 
phosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor. We present the results of an in vitro 
immunological investigation of the hypothesis that PsA functions as a cell 
adhesion molecule (CAM), and of a ligand  binding assay indicating that PsA 
has cell membrane binding partner(s). This is the first evidence to 
implicate a direct role for a putative CAM in cell-cell adhesion during the 
multicellular migratory slug stage of D. discoideum development. Cell-cell 
adhesion assays were carried out in the presence or absence of the monoclonal 
antibody (mAb) MUD1 which has a single antigenic determinant: a peptide 
epitope on PsA. These assays showed specific inhibition of cell-cell adhesion 
by MUD1. Further, it was found that a purified recombinant form of  PsA 
(rPsA), can neutralize the inhibitory effect of MUD1; the inhibitory effect 
on cell-cell adhesion is primarily due to the blocking of PsA by the mAb. 
The resistance of aggregates to dissociation in the presence of 10mM EDTA 
(ethylenediamintetraacetic acid)  indicates that PsA mediates EDTA-stable 
cell-cell contacts, and that PsA-mediated cell adhesion is likely to be 
independent of divalent cations such as Ca 2+ or Mg 2+.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The three-dimensional model of Dictyostelium discoideum racE based on the 
human rhoA-GDP crystal structure 

Madhavi Agarwala, Donald J. Nelsonb and Denis A. Larochellea 

a Department of Biology, Clark University, 950 Main Street, Worcester, 
MA 01610, USA; b Department of Chemistry, Clark University, 950 Main Street, 
Worcester, MA 01610, USA 

Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-508-793-7664; fax: +1-508-793-8861;  email: 
magarwal@clarku.edu 

Journal of Molecular Graphics and Modelling 21, 3-18

Abstract

The three-dimensional structure of racE was modeled using several homologous 
small G proteins, and the best model obtained using the human rhoA as 
modeling template is reported. The three-dimensional fold of the racE model 
is remarkably similar to the cellular form of human ras p21 crystal 
structure. Its secondary structure consists of six  -helices, six  -strands 
and three 310 helices. The model retains its secondary structure after a 
300 K, 300 ps molecular dynamics (MD) simulation. Important domains of the 
protein include its effector loop (residues 3446), the insertion domain 
(residues 121136), and the polybasic motif (between 210 and 220) not 
modeled in the current structure. The effector loop is inherently flexible 
and the structure docked with GDP exhibits the effector loop moving 
significantly closer to the nucleotide binding pocket, forming a tighter 
complex with the bound GDP. The mobility of the effector loop is conferred 
by a single residue `hinge' point at residue 34Asp, also allowing the 
Switch I region, immediately preceding the effector loop, to be equally 
mobile. In comparison, the Switch II region shows average mobility. The 
insertion domain is highly flexible, with the insertion taking the form 
of a helical domain, with several charged residues forming a complex 
charged interface over the entire insertion region. While the GDP moiety 
is loosely held in the active site, the metal cation is extensively 
co-ordinated. The critical residue 38Thr exhibits high mobility, and is 
seen interacting directly with the metal ion at a distance of 2.64 , and 
indirectly via an intervening water molecule. 64Gln, a key residue involved 
in GTP hydrolysis in ras, is seen facing the  -phosphate group and the metal 
ion. Certain residues (i.e. 51Asn, 38Thr and 65Glu) exhibit unique 
characteristics and these residues, together with 158Val, may play important 
roles in the maintenance of the protein's integrity and function. There is 
strong consensus of secondary structural elements between models generated 
using various templates, such as h-rac1, h-rhoA and h-cdc42 bound to RhoGDI, 
all sharing only 5055% sequence identity with racE, which suggests that 
this model is in all probability an accurate prediction of the true tertiary 
structure of racE. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A novel cGMP-signaling pathway mediating myosin phosphorylation and 
chemotaxis in Dictyostelium

Leonard Bosgraaf#, Henk Russcher#, Janet L. Smith^, Deborah Wessels*, David 
R. Soll* and Peter J.M. Van Haastert# 

# Department of Biochemistry, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, 9747 
AG Groningen, the Netherlands. ^ Boston Biomedical Research Institute, 64 
Grove Street, Watertown, Massachusetts 02472-2829, U.S.A. * W.M. Keck Dynamic 
Image Analysis Facility, Department of Biological Sciences, University of 
Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, U.S.A.


EMBO J, in press

Chemotactic stimulation of Dictyostelium cells results in a transient 
increase in cGMP levels, and transient phosphorylation of myosin II heavy 
and regulatory light chains. In Dictyostelium, two guanylyl cyclases and 
four candidate cGMP-binding proteins (GbpA-D) are implicated in cGMP 
signaling. GbpA and GbpB are homologous proteins with a Zn2+-hydrolase 
domain. A double gbpA/gbpB gene disruption leads to a reduction of cGMP-
phosphodiesterase activity and a ten-fold increase of basal and stimulated 
cGMP levels. Chemotaxis in gbpA-B- cells is associated with increased myosin 
II phosphorylation compared to wild type cells; formation of lateral 
pseudopodia is suppressed resulting in enhanced chemotaxis. GbpC is 
homologous to GbpD, and contains Ras, MAPKKK and Ras-GEF domains. 
Inactivation of the gbp genes indicates that only GbpC harbours high 
affinity cGMP-binding activity. Myosin phosphorylation, assembly of myosin 
in the cytoskeleton as well as chemotaxis are severely impaired in mutants 
lacking GbpC and D, or mutants lacking both guanylyl cyclases. Thus a novel 
cGMP-signaling cascade is critical for chemotaxis in Dictyostelium, and 
plays a major role in myosin II regulation during this process.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

An observation of the initial stage towards a symbiotic relationship

Masahiko Todoriki 1, Shinya Oki 1, Shin-Ichi Matsuyama1, Elizabeth P. 
Ko-Mitamura1, Itaru Urabe 1 and Tetsuya Yomo 1,2,3*

1Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka 
University, 2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita City, 2PRESTO, JST, 2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita 
City, Osaka 565-0871, Japan and 3Department of Pure and Applied Sciences, 
University of Tokyo, Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan.

*Corresponding author.  Mailing address: Department of Biotechnology, Graduate 
School of Engineering, Osaka University, 2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita City, Osaka 
565-0871, Japan. E-mail: yomo@bio.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp; Tel. :+81-6-6879-7427; 
Fax: +81-6-6879-7428

BioSystems 65 (2002) 105?112

Abstract

   Two well-characterized and phylogenetically different species, Escherichia 
coli and Dictyostelium discoideum, were used as the model organisms. When the 
two species were mixed and allowed to grow on minimal agar plates at 22?C, the 
two species remarkably achieved a state of coexistence at about two weeks. In
 addition, the emerged colonies housing the coexisting species have a mucoidal 
nature that was not observed from its origin. Moreover, the state of 
coexistence was confirmed to be stable, and so does the mucoidal nature of 
the emerged colonies. Comparing with the pure E.coli origin, mucoidal colony 
showed a significant increase in higher molecular weight extracellular 
components, with polysaccharide as the major constituent. Qualitative 
analysis of the monosaccharide contents in the extracellular components of 
the mucoidal colony revealed not only a significant increase in the glucose 
content, but also significant amount of additional xylose and galactose. 
The system permits the initial stages of the development of relationship 
between two species be captured within a short period of time.   This 
feature, together with being simple and reproducible on laboratory
 conditions, hence provides a new model system for the study of symbiosis, 
especially when initial stages are concerned.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 19, number 3]

 
