Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 19, number 11
November 23, 2002

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at DictyBase--http://dictybase.org.

=============
  Abstracts
=============

A checkpoint of growth/differentiation transition in the cell cycle and its 
relevance to pattern formation in Dictyostelium development

Yasuo Maeda*, Kazunori Sasaki and Aiko Amagai

Department of Developmental Biology and Neurosciences, Graduate School of 
Life Sciences, Tohoku University, Aoba, Sendai 980-8578, Japan
  
Recent Research Developments in Biophysics and Biochemistry, in press 
(a review article)

ABSTRACT

In general, growth and differentiation are mutually exclusive, but are 
cooperatively controlled during the course of development. The cellular 
slime mold Dictyostelium, a wonderful model organism, grows and multiplies 
as long as nutrients are supplied, and its differentiation is triggered by 
starvation. A strict checkpoint (PS-point) from which cells switch growth 
to differentiation has been specified in the cell cycle of D. discoideum 
Ax-2 cells. Thus, Ax-2 cells start differentiating from the PS-point in 
response to starvation, indicating that one needs to combine data on events 
occurring around the PS-point with those on starvation-induced events to 
understand the mechanism controlling growth/differentiation transition (GDT). 
As was expected from the presence of PS-point, the cell s positioning in 
cell masses and the subsequent cell-type choice occur greatly depending on 
the cell s phase in the cell cycle at the onset of starvation. Novel and 
somewhat unexpected functions of mitochondria in cell movement and 
differentiation are also referred. 

submitted by: Yasuo MAEDA [ymaeda@mail.cc.tohoku.ac.jp]

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

CONTRASTING  ACTIVITIES OF THE AGGREGATIVE AND LATE PDSA PROMOTERS IN 
DICTYOSTELIUM DEVELOPMENT. 


Karin E. Weening1, Irene Verkerke-Van Wijk2, Christopher R. Thompson3, 
Richard H. Kessin4, Gregory J. Podgorski5 and Pauline Schaap1


1School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK
2Department of Biology, University of Leiden, 2333 AL Leiden, The Netherlands
3MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, CB2 2QH, UK
4Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Physicians and Surgeons 
of Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA
5Department of Biology, Utah State University, Logan UT 84322-5305, USA

Developmental Biology, in press

ABSTRACT

  Expression of the Dictyostelium PdsA gene from the aggregative (PdA) 
and late (PdL) promoter is essential for aggregation and slug morphogenesis 
respectively. We studied the regulation of the PdA and PdL promoters in 
slugs using labile beta-galactosidase (gal) reporter enzymes. PdL was active 
in prestalk cells as was also found  with stable gal. PdA activity 
decreased strongly in slugs from all cells except those at the rear. This 
is almost opposite to PdA activity traced with stable gal, where slugs 
showed sustained activity with highest levels at the front. PdA was down-
regulated after aggregation irrespective of stimulation with any of the 
factors known to control gene expression.  PdL activity was induced in 
cell suspension by cAMP and DIF acting in synergy. However, a DIF-less 
mutant showed normal PdL activity during development, suggesting that DIF 
does not control PdL  in vivo. Dissection of the PdL promoter showed that 
all sequences essential for correct spatio-temporal control of promoter 
activity are downstream of the transcription start site in a region between 
-383 and  -19 nucleotides relative to the start codon. Removal of 
nucleotides to position -364 eliminated responsiveness to DIF and cAMP, 
but normal PdL activity in prestalk cells in slugs was retained. Further 
5' deletions abolished all promoter activity. This result also indicates 
that the induction by DIF and cAMP as seen in cell suspensions is not 
essential for PdL activity in normal development. 

submitted by: Pauline Schaap [PSchaap@lsstaff.dundee.ac.uk]

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Formation of the outer layer of the Dictyostelium spore coat depends on the 
inner layer protein SP85/PsB

Talibah Metcalf, Karen Kelley, Gregory W. Erdos, Lee Kaplan, and Christopher 
M. West

Dept. of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, and Electron 
Microscopy Core Laboratory, ICBR, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL  
32610-0235  USA

Microbiology, in press

ABSTRACT

The Dictyostelium spore is surrounded by a 220-micron thick trilaminar coat 
that consists of inner and outer electron dense layers surrounding a central 
region of cellulose microfibrils. In previous studies, a mutant strain (TL56) 
lacking three proteins associated with the outer layer exhibited increased 
permeability to macromolecular tracers, suggesting that this layer 
contributes to the coat permeability barrier. Electron microscopy now shows 
that the outer layer is incomplete in the coats of this mutant, and consists 
of a residual regular array of punctate electron densities. The outer layer 
is also incomplete in a mutant lacking a cellulose-binding protein 
associated with the inner layer, and these coats are deficient in an outer 
layer protein and another coat protein. To examine the mechanism by which 
this inner layer protein, SP85, contributes to outer layer formation, 
various domain fragments were overexpressed in forming spores. Most of these 
exert dominant negative effects similar to the deletion of outer layer 
proteins but one construct, consisting of a fusion of the N-terminal and 
Cys-rich C1-domain, induces a dense mat of novel filaments at the surface 
of the outer layer. Biochemical studies show that the C1-domain binds 
cellulose, and a combination of site-directed mutations that inhibits its 
cellulose-binding activity suppresses outer layer filament induction. The 
results suggest that, in addition to a previously described early role in 
regulating cellulose synthesis, SP85 subsequently contributes a cross-
bridging function between cellulose and other coat proteins to organize 
previously unrecognized structural elements in the outer layer of the coat.

submitted by: Chris West [westcm@anatomy.med.ufl.edu]

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A model for cGMP signal transduction in Dictyostelium in perspective of 25 
years of cGMP research

Leonard Bosgraaf and Peter J.M. van Haastert

Department of Biochemistry, University of Groningen,Nijenborgh 4, 9747 
AG Groningen, the Netherlands

Journal of Muscle Research and Cell Motility, Special Issue: Dictyostelium

Ed. Dietmar J. Manstein, in press


Abstract

About twenty-five years ago, it was discovered that cGMP is produced 
intracellularly when cells are exposed to chemoattractants. Shortly 
hereafter, cGMP-degrading and cGMP-producing activities were found in 
Dictyostelium lysates, as well as cGMP-binding activity. In the eighties 
several mutants were isolated displaying aberrant cGMP metabolism as well 
as altered chemotaxis, suggesting that cGMP plays a role in chemotaxis. 
Recently we identified the genes encoding guanylyl cyclases, cGMP-
phosphodiesterases and cGMP-binding proteins, that probably constitute 
the main components of the cGMP signal transduction pathway. The encoding 
proteins appear to be very different from proteins with the same function in 
metazoa, and therefore their biochemistry is not always easily interpreted. 
The aim of this review is to discuss the previously obtained biochemical 
and functional data on cGMP in Dictyostelium in the perspective of the 
recently identified genes.  
  
submitted by: P.J.M.van.Haastert [P.J.M.van.Haastert@chem.rug.nl]

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

cGMP signalling: different ways to create a pathway

Jeroen Roelofs1 , Janet L. Smith2 and Peter J.M. Van Haastert1 

1, Department of Biochemistry, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, 9747 
AG Groningen, the Netherlands
2, Boston Biomedical Research Institute, 64 Grove Street, Watertown, 
Massachusetts 02472-2829, U.S.A.

Trends in Genetics, in press.

Abstract

A novel cGMP signalling cascade was uncovered in Dictyostelium, a eukaryote 
that diverged from the lineage to metazoa after plants but before yeast. In 
both Dictyostelium and metazoa, the ancient cAMP binding (cNB) motif of 
bacterial CAP has been modified and assembled with other domains into cGMP-
target proteins. The domain structures of these cGMP targets, as well as the 
enzymes responsible for cGMP synthesis and degradation, are entirely 
different between Dictyostelium and metazoa, suggesting that different 
cGMP-signalling pathways evolved in these two lineages.  

submitted by: P.J.M.van.Haastert [P.J.M.van.Haastert@chem.rug.nl]

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 19, number 11]

 
