Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 19, number 4
August 10, 2002

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at DictyBase--http://dictybase.org.


=============
  Abstracts
=============

MECHANISTICS OF AMOEBOID LOCOMOTION: SIGNAL TO FORCES

Yoshio Fukui

Cell Biology International, accepted for publication, 08/08/2002

Dictyostelium serves as an ideal model system for studying the molecular 
and structural properties of the actomyosin and microtubule systems. This 
organism also has been the vehicle on which the gene-targeting technique 
was pioneered. Dictyostelium also represents a small number of organisms 
whose chemotactic ligand-receptor mechanism has been well characterized. 
This article reviews recent advances in studies of the actin-based 
cytoskeletal system in Dictyostelium, focusing on the mechanistic aspects 
of the amoeboid motion. Special emphasis is placed on the recently 
identified cell-substrate-anchoring structures  eupodia , and the 
measurement of single-cell migration forces. The recent advances in signal 
transduction cascade is also discussed with relevance to the mechanistics 
in amoeboid locomotion.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Identification of a novel type of cGMP phosphodiesterase that is defective 
in the chemotactic stmF mutants

Marcel E. Meima, Ricardo M. Biondi and Pauline Schaap.

School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, MSI/WTB complex, 
Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK.

Mol. Biol. Cell, in press.

ABSTRACT

	StmF mutants are chemotactic mutants that are defective in a cGMP 
phosphodiesterase (PDE) activity. We identified a novel gene, PdeD, which 
harbours two  cyclic nucleotide binding domains and a metallo-$-lactamase 
homology domain. Similar to stmF mutants, pdeD  null mutants displayed 
extensively streaming aggregates, prolonged elevation of cGMP levels after 
chemotactic stimulation and reduced cGMP-PDE  activity. PdeD  transcripts 
were lacking in stmF mutant NP377, indicating that this mutant carries a 
PdeD lesion. Expression of a PdeD-YFP fusion protein in pdeD null cells 
restored the normal cGMP response and showed that PdeD resides in the 
cytosol. When purified by immunoprecipitation, the PdeD-YFP fusion protein 
displayed cGMP-PDE activity, which was retained in a truncated construct 
that contained only the metallo-$-lactamase domain.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A secreted cell-number counting factor represses intracellular glucose 
levels to regulate group size in Dictyostelium

Wonhee Jang, Binh Chiem, and Richard H. Gomer

Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005-1892

Journal of Biological Chemistry, in press

Summary

Developing Dictyostelium cells form evenly sized groups of ~2 x 104 cells. 
A secreted 450 kDa protein complex called counting factor (CF) regulates 
group size by repressing cell-cell adhesion and myosin polymerization, and 
increasing cAMP-stimulated cAMP production, actin polymerization, and cell 
motility.  We find that CF regulates group size in part by repressing 
internal glucose levels.  Transformants lacking bioactive CF and wild-type 
cells with extracellular CF depleted by antibodies have high glucose levels, 
while transformants oversecreting CF have low glucose levels.  A component 
of CF, countin, affects group size in a manner similar to CF, and a 1-minute 
exposure of cells to countin decreases glucose levels.  Adding 1 mM 
exogenous glucose negates the effect of high levels of extracellular CF on 
group size and mimics the effect of depleting CF on glucose levels, cell-
cell adhesion, cAMP pulse size, actin polymerization, myosin assembly, and 
motility.  These results suggest that glucose is a downstream component in 
part of the CF signaling pathway, and may be relevant to the observed role 
of the insulin pathway in tissue size regulation in higher eukaryotes.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Identification and Characterization of Two Unusual cGMP-stimulated 
Phoshodiesterases in Dictyostelium

Leonard Bosgraaf, Henk Russcher, Helena Snippe, Sonya Bader, Joyce Wind, and 
Peter J.M. Van Haastert

Department of Biochemistry, University of Groningen,Nijenborgh 4, 9747 AG 
Groningen, the Netherlands

Molecular Biology of the Cell, in press

Recently we recognized two genes, gbpA and gbpB, encoding putative cGMP-
binding proteins with a Zn2+-hydrolase domain and two cyclic nucleotide 
binding (cNB) domains. The Zn2+-hydrolase domains belong to the superfamily 
of beta-lactamases, also harboring a small family of class II 
phosphodiesterases from bacteria and lower eukaryotes. Gene inactivation 
and overexpression studies demonstrate that gbpA encodes the cGMP-stimulated 
cGMP-phosphodiesterase that was characterized biochemically previously, and 
shown to be involved in chemotaxis. cAMP neither activates nor is a 
substrate of GbpA. The gbpB gene is expressed mainly in the multicellular 
stage and appears to encode a dual specificity phosphodiesterase with 
preference for cAMP. The enzyme hydrolyses cAMP about 9-fold faster than 
cGMP, and is activated by cAMP and cGMP with a Ka of about 0.7 and 2.3 m M, 
respectively. Cells with a deletion of the gbpB gene have increased basal 
and receptor stimulated cAMP levels, and are sporogeneous. We propose that 
GbpA and GbpB hydrolyze the substrate in the Zn2+-hydrolase domain, while 
the cNB domains mediate activation. The human cGMP-stimulated cAMP/cGMP 
phosphodiesterase has similar biochemical properties, but a completely 
different topology: hydrolysis takes place by a class I catalytic domain 
and GAF domains mediate cGMP-activation.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

TEMPERATURE-SENSITIVE INHIBITION OF DEVELOPMENT IN DICTYOSTELIUM DUE TO A 
POINT MUTATION IN THE piaA GENE

Barbara Pergolizzi, Barbara Peracino, James Silverman#, Adriano Ceccarelli, 
Angelika Noegel*, Peter Devreotes# and Salvatore Bozzaro


ABSTRACT

The Dictyostelium mutant HSB1 is temperature-sensitive for development, 
undergoing aggregation and fruiting body formation at temperatures below 18C 
but not above. In vivo G protein-linked adenylylcyclase activation is 
defective in HSB1 and the enzyme is not stimulated in vitro by GTPgS; 
stimulation is restored upon addition of wild-type cytosol.  Transfection 
with the gene encoding the cytosolic regulator PIA rescued the mutant.  We 
excluded the possibility that HSB1 cells fail to express PIA and show that 
the HSB1 piaA gene harbours a point mutation, resulting in the aminoacid 
exchange G917D. Both wild-type and HSB1 cells were also transfected with 
the HSB1 piaA gene. The piaAHSB1 gene product displayed a partial inhibitory 
effect on wild-type cell development. We hypothesize that PIA couples the 
heterotrimeric G protein to adenylyl cyclase via two binding sites, one of 
which is altered in a temperature-sensitive way by the HSB1 mutation. When 
overexpressed in the wild-type background, PIAHSB1 competes with wild-type 
PIA via the non-mutated binding site, resulting in dominant-negative 
inhibition of development. Expression of GFP-fused PIA shows that PIA is 
homogeneously distributed in the cytoplasm of chemoctically moving cells.


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 19, number 4]

 
