Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 19, number 12
November 30, 2002

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been 
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other 
useful information is available at DictyBase--http://dictybase.org.

=============
  Abstracts
=============

An RGS-Containing Kinase is Important for Chemotaxis and Multicellular 
Development in Dictyostelium

Binggang Sun and Richard A. Firtel

in press: Molecular Biology of the Cell

ABSTRACT

We have identified a gene encoding RCK1, a novel RGS domain-containing 
protein kinase.  RCK1 mutant strains exhibit strong aggregation and 
chemotaxis defects.  rck1 null cells chemotax ~50% faster than wild-type 
cells, suggesting RCK1 plays a negative regulatory role in chemotaxis.  
Consistent with this finding, overexpression of wild-type RCK1 reduces 
chemotaxis speed by ~40%.  Upon cAMP stimulation, RCK1 transiently 
translocates to the membrane/cortex region with membrane localization 
peaking at ~10 sec, similar to the kinetics of membrane localization of 
the PH domain-containing proteins CRAC, Akt/PKB, and PhdA. RCK1 kinase 
activity also increases dramatically. The RCK1 kinase activity does not 
rapidly adapt, but decreases after the cAMP stimulus is removed.  This is 
particularly novel considering that most other chemoattractant-activated 
kinases (e.g. Akt/PKB, ERK1, ERK2, and PAKa) rapidly adapt after activation.

Using site-directed mutagenesis, we further show that both the RGS and 
kinase domains are required for RCK1 function and that RCK1 kinase activity 
is required for the delocalization of RCK1 from the plasma membrane.  
Genetic evidence suggests RCK1 function lies downstream from Ga2, the 
heterotrimeric G protein that couples to the cAMP chemoattractant receptors.

We suggest that RCK1 might be part of an adaptation pathway that regulates 
aspects of chemotaxis in Dictyostelium.  


submitted by: Rick Firtel [rafirtel@ucsd.edu]

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-

THE ROLE OF BEACH PROTEINS IN DICTYOSTELIUM.

Arturo De Lozanne

Section of Molecular Cell & Developmental Biology 
and Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology,
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712.

TRAFFIC, in press.

ABSTRACT

The BEACH family of proteins is a novel group of proteins with diverse roles

in eukaryotic cells.  The identifying feature of these proteins is the BEACH

domain named after the founding members of this family, the mouse beige and 
the human Chediak-Higashi Syndrome (CHS) proteins.  Although all BEACH 
proteins share a similar structural organization they appear to have very 
distinct cellular roles ranging from lysosomal traffic, to apoptosis and 
cytokinesis.  Very little is currently known about the function of most of 
these proteins, few binding-partner proteins have been identified and no 
molecular mechanism for any of these proteins has been discovered.  Thus, 
it is important to establish good model systems for the study of these 
novel proteins.  Dictyostelium contains six BEACH proteins that can be 
classified into four subclasses.  Two of them, LvsA and LvsB, have clearly 
distinct roles in the cell.  LvsA is localized on the contractile vacuole 
membrane and is essential for cytokinesis and osmoregulation.  LvsB is 
most similar in sequence to the mammalian beige/CHS proteins and shares 
with them a common function in lysosomal trafficking.  Structural and 
functional analysis of these proteins in Dictyostelium will help elucidate 
the function of this enigmatic novel family of proteins.

submitted by: (a.delozanne@mail.utexas.edu)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-

The Dictyostelium prestalk cell inducer DIF regulates nuclear accumulation 
of a STAT protein by controlling its rate of export from the nucleus

Masashi Fukuzawa+, Tomoaki Abe+ and Jeffrey G. Williams*, 

School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, MSI/WTB Complex, Dow Street, 
Dundee DD1 5EH, UK

+ These two authors contributed equally to this work

DEVELOPMENT IN PRESS

Summary

Dd-STATc becomes tyrosine phosphorylated, dimerises and accumulates in the 
nuclei of Dictyostelium cells exposed to DIF, the chlorinated hexaphenone 
that directs prestalk cell differentiation. By performing cytoplasmic 
photobleaching of living cells, we show that DIF inhibits the nuclear 
export of Dd-STATc. Within Dd-STATc there is a 50 amino acid region 
containing several consensus CRM1 (exportin 1)-dependent nuclear export 
signals (NESs). Deletion of this region causes Dd-STATc to accumulate in 
the nucleus constitutively and, when coupled to GFP, the same region directs

nuclear export. We show that the N terminal-proximal 46 amino acids are 
necessary for nuclear accumulation of Dd-STATc and sufficient to direct 
constitutive nuclear accumulation when fused to GFP. Combining the 
photobleaching and molecular analyses, we suggest that DIF-induced 
dimerisation of Dd-STATc functionally masks the NES-containing region 
and that this leads to nett nuclear accumulation, directed by the N 
terminal-proximal import signals. These results show that the regulated 
nuclear accumulation of a STAT protein can be controlled at the level of 
nuclear export and they also provide a better understanding of the mechanism

whereby DIF directs cell type divergence.

submitted by: Jeff Williams [j.g.williams@dundee.ac.uk]

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-


Mitochondrial membrane dynamics are altered in cluA- mutants of 
Dictyostelium.   

Fields, S.D., Arana, Q., Heuser, J., and Clarke, M.  

Musc. Res. Cell Motil. (special Dictyostelium issue), in press.

In cluA- mutants of Dictyostelium, mitochondria are clustered near the cell 
center rather than being dispersed throughout the cytoplasm.  We have examined 
two possible mechanisms that could account for this phenotype. First, we 
sought evidence that the cytoskeleton or a presumptive mitochondrion- 
cytoskeleton linkage was altered in mutant cells.  We found that cytoskeletal 
structures in cluA- cells appeared normal by immunostaining, and that the 
distribution of peroxisomes in mutant cells was indistinguishable from that 
in wild type cells.   Treatment of wild type cells with drugs that disrupted

microtubules or actin filaments did not mimic the cluA- phenotype.  Thus, 
cytoskeletal defects seemed unlikely to account for the mitochondrial 
clustering in cluA- cells.  Observation of the movement of GFP-tagged 
mitochondria in wild type cells suggested that mitochondria are transported 
along microtubules, as in mammalian cells, rather than along actin filaments, 
as in budding yeast.  Therefore, the similar phenotypes of cluA- Dictyostelium 
cells and clu1D yeast cells argued against CluA/Clu1p acting as a 
mitochondrion-cytoskeleton linker.   We next examined the ultrastructure of 
mitochondria in freeze-substituted, thin-sectioned cells.   We found that 
the clustered mitochondria in cluA-cells are interconnected.  Often, adjacent 
mitochondria are linked by narrow membranous strands, although sometimes the

mitochondria are partially merged.   The presence of narrow constrictions at

presumptive division sites argues that the constriction step of division 
proceeds normally.  Our data suggest that cluA- cells may be blocked at a 
very late step in fission of the outer mitochondrial membrane.   

submitted by:  Margaret Clarke, PhD [Margaret-Clarke@mail.omrf.ouhsc.edu]

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-

Chaperonin 60 and mitochondrial disease in Dictyostelium.

Martha Kotsifas, Christian Barth, Arturo de Lozanne, Sui T. Lay, and Paul 
R. Fisher

Journal of Muscle Research and Cell Motility. In Press.

Abstract

The single Dictyostelium chaperonin 60 gene, hspA, was cloned, sequenced 
and characterized. Sequence comparisons and a 3-D model for the structure 
of the encoded protein showed that it exhibits the conserved sequence and 
structural features expected for its role as the Dictyostelium mitochondrial

chaperonin 60. Dictyostelium hspA contains two introns and, unusually for 
a member of this major heat shock gene family, is not stress-inducible in 
response to heat, cold or cadmium ions. Although transcription of hspA is 
down regulated during early Dictyostelium development in response to 
starvation, the levels of the chaperonin 60 protein remain constant 
throughout the life cycle. Consistent with the essential role of 
chaperonin 60 in mitochondrial biogenesis, we were unable to isolate 
mutants in which the hspA gene had been disrupted. However, transformants 
were isolated that exhibited differing levels of antisense inhibition of 
chaperonin 60 expression, depending upon the number of copies of the 
antisense-expressing plasmid in the genome. Orientation in phototaxis 
(and thermotaxis) was severely impaired in all antisense transformants, 
while growth and morphogenesis were markedly defective only in 
transformants with higher levels of antisense inhibition. This pattern 
of phenotypes is similar to that reported previously to result from 
targeted disruption of the mitochondrial large subunit rRNA gene in a 
subpopulation of mitochondria. This suggests that, regardless of the 
nature of the underlying genetic defect, mitochondrial deficiency 
impairs signal transduction more sensitively than other cellular 
activities.

submitted by:  Paul Fisher [SMTP:fisher@lumi.micro.latrobe.edu.au] 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-

Multiple Signalling Pathways Connect Chemoattractant Receptors and Calcium 
Channels in Dictyostelium

Thomas Nebl1, Martha Kotsifas1, Pauline Schaap2? and Paul R. Fisher1,*

Journal of Muscle Research and Cell Motility. In Press.

SUMMARY

Dictyostelium mutants expressing aequorin were used to study and compare 
the roles of heterotrimeric G-proteins and the second messengers IP3 and 
cGMP in regulating folate- and cAMP receptor-activated [Ca2+]i signals.  
The calcium responses of vegetative cells to folate were dramatically 
impaired in Gb and Ga4 null mutants but were restored with altered kinetics 
and temperature-sensitivity in Gb null mutants overexpressing wild type 
and temperature-sensitive Gb isoforms.  Folic acid receptors thus mediate 
changes in [Ca2+]i via a Ga4bg-dependent pathway. Neither folate nor cAMP- 
induced [Ca2+]i  signals were significantly altered in PLC null 
transformants, but [Ca2+]i changes elicited by both attractants were 
significantly prolonged in two stmF mutants lacking cGMP-specific 
phosphodiesterase activity.  This confirms an important role of cGMP in 
regulating receptor-activated Ca2+ uptake and/or extrusion systems.  This 
cGMP-dependent part of the Ca2+ response to cAMP stimuli was developmentally

down-regulated and all but disappeared by the time the cells reached full 
aggregation competence after 8 hours of starvation.  The results suggest 
that folate and cAMP receptor-activated [Ca2+]i signals are regulated in a 
complex manner via multiple signalling pathways, one that is G-protein- 
and cGMP-dependent (present at the vegetative and early poststarvation 
stage) and another that is  G-protein-independent (dominant in fully 
aggregation-competent cells at ~ 8 hours post starvation). 

submitted by: Paul Fisher [SMTP:fisher@lumi.micro.latrobe.edu.au] 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-
[End Dicty News, volume 19, number 12]

 
