Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 19, number 8
October 12, 2002

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at DictyBase--http://dictybase.org.

==============================
  Postdoc Position Available
==============================

Postdoctoral position in the Wellcome Trust Biocentre at the University 
of Dundee

A postdoctoral position is available in Dr. Inke Nthke s laboratory to 
join a team studying the function of the Adenomatous Polyposis Coli tumour 
suppressor protein (APC).  The project will involve using Dictyostelium 
Discoideum to investigate the role of APC in cytoskeletal dynamics and 
organisation.  The general aim of work in the laboratory is to determine 
how the diverse functions of APC relate to its role in cancer and how 
these functions are co-ordinated and regulated.  Experimental approaches 
include general cell- and molecular biology techniques combined with 
high-resolution fluorescence microscopy and use of Dictyostelium as a 
model organism.  The candidate will join a small, dynamic, highly 
interactive research team with active collaborations worldwide.

A proven research ability and motivation are required and experience 
in working with Dictyostelium is requisite.  Experience in general 
cell biology and molecular biology is essential.  The position is 
available immediately for 2 years in the first instance.  For informal 
enquiries, please contact Dr. Inke S. Nthke (+ 44 1382 345821; 
e-mail: i.s.nathke@dundee.ac.uk).  Applications should be directed to: 
Janette Cordiner, School Administrator, School of Life Sciences, 
MSI/WTB Complex, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee, DD1 5EH; 
j.m.cordiner@dundee.ac.uk.   Please cite reference  SC/763/1 on the 
application.

The Wellcome Trust Biocentre is part of the internationally renowned 
WTB/MSI complex at the University of Dundee. The complex provides an 
extremely interactive research environment and houses nearly 400 
research staff.  Further information about research in the WTB/MSI 
complex can be obtained at http://www.dundee.ac.uk/biocentre/.

=============
  Abstracts
=============

CaMBOT: Profiling and Characterizing Calmodulin Binding Proteins

Danton H. O Day
Department of Zoology, University of Toronto at Mississauga, Mississauga, 
ON   L5L 1C6
CANADA

Cellular Signalling (in press)

Abstract
Calmodulin (CaM) is an essential calcium-binding protein that binds to and 
activates a diverse population of downstream targets (calmodulin binding 
proteins; CaMBPs) that carry out its critical signalling functions. In 
spite of the central importance of CaM in Ca2+-mediated signal transduction 
pathways in all eukaryotes, most CaMBPs remain to be identified and 
characterized. SDS-PAGE followed by gel overlay with recombinant, 
metabolically radiolabelled CaM (Calmodulin Binding Overlay Technique, 
CaMBOT) is a valuable method for following behavioral, developmental, 
forensic and physiological changes in total CaMBP populations and to 
identify candidate CaMBPs for further study. CaMBOT has also been adapted 
to isolate cDNAs encoding novel CaMBPs in various organisms. Recently the 
method was used to examine the CaMBP complement encoded by the Arabidopsis 
genome and to identify a new family of transcription activators. To add to 
its diversity, CaMBOT may be useful for finding target proteins for work 
on phytoremediation and for the screening of pharmaceuticals and toxic 
agents that, directly or indirectly, affect CaM and its target proteins. 
This review discusses all of these topics and the role of CaMBOT in 
characterizing a functional unit of the proteome proteins regulated by 
calmodulin.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Myosin Heavy Chain Kinase B participates in the regulation of myosin 
assembly into the cytoskeleton.

Maribel Rico and Thomas T. Egelhoff
Department of Physiology and Biophysics,
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland. OH. 44106-4970

Journal of Cellular Biochemistry, in press

Abstract

Myosin II plays critical roles in events such as cytokinesis, chemotactic 
migration, and morphological changes during multicellular development.  The 
amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum provides a simple system for the study of 
this contractile protein.  In this system, myosin II filament assembly is 
regulated by myosin heavy chain (MHC) phosphorylation in the tail region of 
the molecule.  Earlier studies identified an alpha- kinase, myosin heavy 
chain kinase A (MHCK A), which phosphorylates three mapped threonine 
residues in the myosin tail, driving myosin disassembly. Using molecular 
and genomic approaches we have identified a series of related kinases in 
Dictyostelium. The enzyme MHCK B shares with MHCK A a domain organization 
that includes a highly novel catalytic domain coupled to a 
carboxyl-terminal WD repeat domain.
We have engineered, expressed and purified a FLAG-tagged version of the 
novel kinase. In the present study, we report detailed biochemical and 
cellular studies documenting that MHCK B plays a physiological role in the 
control of Dictyostelium myosin II assembly and disassembly during the 
vegetative life of Dictyostelium amoebae.  The presented data supports a 
model of multiple related MHCKs in this system, with different regulatory 
mechanisms and pathways controlling each enzyme.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
Dictyostelium discoideum has a single diacylglycerol kinase gene with 
similarity to mammalian theta isoforms

Marc A. de la Roche1, Janet L. Smith2, Maribel Rico3, Silvia Carrasco4, 
Isabel Merida4, Lucila Licate3, Graham P. Ct1, and Thomas T. Egelhoff3#

1. Department of Biochemistry
     Queen s University
     Kingston, Ontario  K7L 3N6, Canada
2.  Boston Biomedical Research Institute
      64 Grove St.
      Watertown, MA 02472-2829
3.  Department of Physiology and Biophysics
     Case Western Reserve School of Medicine
     Cleveland, OH 44016-4970
4  Department of Immunology and Oncology
      National Center for Biotechnology
      Campus de Cantoblanco
      Madrid 28049, Spain

# Corresponding author

Biochemical Journal (online as preprint), in press

Synopsis

Diacylglycerol kinases (DGKs) phosphorylate the neutral lipid 
diacylglycerol (DG) to produce phosphatidic acid (PA).  In mammalian 
systems DGKs are a complex family of at least 9 isoforms that are thought 
to participate in downregulation of DG-based signaling pathways and perhaps 
activation of PA-stimulated signaling events.  We report here that the 
simple protozoan amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum appears to contain a 
single gene encoding a DGK enzyme.  This gene, dgkA, encodes a deduced 
protein that contains three C1-type cysteine-rich repeats, a DGK catalytic 
domain most closely related to the theta subtype of mammalian DGKs, and a 
carboxyl-terminal segment containing a proline/glutamine-rich region and a 
large aspargine-repeat region.  This gene corresponds to a previously 
reported myosin II heavy chain kinase designated "MHC-PKC", but our 
analysis clearly demonstrate that this protein does not, as suggested by 
earlier data, contain a protein kinase catalytic domain.  A FLAG-tagged 
version of DgkA expressed in Dictyostelium displayed robust diacylglycerol 
kinase activity. Earlier studies indicating that disruption of this locus 
alters myosin II assembly levels in Dictyostelium raise the intriguing 
possibility that DG and/or PA metabolism may play a role in controlling 
myosin II assembly in this system.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A Bifunctional Di-Glycosyltransferase Forms the Fuca1,2Galb1,3-Disaccharide 
on Skp1 in the Cytoplasm of Dictyostelium

Hanke van der Wel, Suzanne Z. Fisher,  and Christopher M. West

Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Florida College of 
Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610-0235  USA

J. Biol. Chem., in press

Skp1 is a subunit of the SCF-family of E3-ubiquitin ligases and of other 
regulatory complexes in the cytoplasm and nucleus. In Dictyostelium, Skp1 
is modified by a pentasaccharide with the type I blood group H antigen 
(Fuca1,2Galb1,3GlcNAc-) at its core. Addition of the Fuc is catalyzed by FT85, 
a 768-amino acid protein whose fucosyltransferase activity maps to the 
C-terminal half of the protein. A strain whose FT85 gene is interrupted by 
a genetic insertion produces a truncated, GlcNAc-terminated glycan on Skp1, 
suggesting that FT85 may also have b-galactosyltransferase activity. In 
support of this model, highly-purified native and recombinant FT85 are each 
able to galactosylate Skp1 from FT85-mutant cells. Site-directed mutagenesis 
of predicted key amino acids in the N-terminal region of FT85 abolishes Skp1 
b-galactosyltransferase activity with minimal effects on the fucosyltransferase. 
In addition, a recombinant form of the N-terminal region exhibits 
b-galactosyltransferase but not fucosyltransferase activity. Kinetic 
analysis of FT85 suggests that its two glycosyltransferase activities 
normally modify Skp1 processively but can have partial function individually. 
In conclusion, FT85 is a bifunctional di-glycosyltransferase that appears to 
be designed to efficiently extend the Skp1 glycan in vivo.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Evolutionary and functional implications of the complex glycosylation of Skp1, 
a cytoplasmic/nuclear glycoprotein associated with polyubiquitination

Christopher M. West

Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Florida College of 
Medicine, Gainesville, FL  32610-0235  (USA), Fax +1 352 392 3305, e-mail: 
westcm@ufl.edu

Cell and Molecular Life Sciences, in press.

Protein degradation is regulatory for the cell cycle, signal transduction and 
gene transcription. A critical step is the selective marking of the target 
protein, resulting in polyubiquitination by one of a large number of E3-ubiquitin 
ligases. Both target marking and E3-ubiquitin ligase activity are associated 
with common as well as unusual posttranslational modifications. For example, 
hydroxylation of Pro-residues and modification of Asn-residues by high-mannose 
sugar chains can target the modified proteins for rapid polyubiquitination 
in the mammalian cytoplasm. Both prolyl hydroxylation and glycosylation also 
occur on Skp1, a subunit of the SCF-class of E3-ubiquitin ligases, from 
Dictyostelium. In this case, a pentasaccharide containing Gal, Fuc and GlcNAc 
is attached to the HyPro-residue. The sugars are added sequentially by enzymes 
that reside in the cytoplasm rather than the secretory pathway. Two of the 
glycosyltransferases appear to be positioned in ancient evolutionary lineages 
that bridge prokaryotes and eukaryotes. The first, which attaches GlcNAc to 
HyPro, is related to enzymes that form a-GalNAc- and a-GlcNAc-Ser/Thr linkages 
in the Golgi. GlcNAc is extended by a bifunctional glycosyltransferase that 
mediates the ordered addition of b1,3-linked Gal and a1,2-linked Fuc, using 
an architecture resembling that of 2-domain prokaryotic glycosyltransferases 
involved in glycosaminoglycan synthesis. Mutational and pharmacological 
perturbation of glycosylation alters the subcellular localization of Skp1 and 
growth properties of cells. Prolyl hydroxylation and complex O-glycosylation 
provide the cell with new options for epigenetic regulation of protein turnover 
in its cytoplasmic and nuclear compartments.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Molecular Cloning and Expression of a UDP-GlcNAc:Hydroxyproline Polypeptide 
GlcNAc-Transferase that Modifies Skp1 in the Cytoplasm of Dictyostelium

Hanke van der Wela, Howard R. Morrisb,c, Maria Panicob, Thanai Paxtonb, Anne 
Dellb, Lee Kaplana, and Christopher M. Westa,d

aDepartment of Anatomy & Cell Biology, University of Florida College of 
Medicine, Gainesville, FL  USA  32610-0235; bDepartment of Biological 
Sciences, Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine, London 
SW7 2AY, UK; cM-SCAN Research and Training Center, Silwood Park, 
Ascot SL5 7PZ, UK

J. Biol. Chem., in press.

Skp1 is a ubiquitous eukaryotic protein found in several cytoplasmic and 
nuclear protein complexes, including the SCF-type E3 ubiquitin ligase. In 
Dictyostelium, Skp1 is hydroxylated at proline-143 which is then modified 
by a pentasaccharide chain. The enzyme activity that attaches the first 
sugar, GlcNAc, was previously shown to copurify with the GnT51 polypeptide 
whose gene has now been cloned using a proteomics approach based on a Q-TOF 
hybrid mass spectrometer. When expressed in E. coli, recombinant GnT51 
exhibits UDP-GlcNAc:hydroxyproline Skp1 GlcNAc-Transferase activity. Based 
on amino acid sequence alignments, GnT51 defines a new family of microbial 
polypeptide glycosyltransferases that appear to be distantly related to the 
catalytic domain of mucin-type UDP-GalNAc:Ser/Thr polypeptide 
a-GalNAc-Transferases expressed in the Golgi compartment of animal cells. 
This relationship is supported by the effects of site-directed mutagenesis 
of amino acids associated with GnT51's predicted DxD-like motif, DAH. In 
contrast, GnT51 lacks the NH2-terminal signal anchor sequence present in 
the Golgi enzymes, consistent with the cytoplasmic localization of the Skp1 
acceptor substrate and the biochemical properties of the enzyme. The first 
glycosylation step of Dictyostelium Skp1 is concluded to be mechanistically 
similar to that of animal mucin type O-linked glycosylation except that it 
occurs in the cytoplasm rather than the Golgi compartment of the cell.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

GenePath: a System for Automated Construction of Genetic Networks from Mutant 
Data

Blaz Zupan, Janez Demsar, Ivan Bratko, Peter Juvan, John A. Halter, Adam 
Kuspa and Gad Shaulsky

University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Computer and Information Science and  
Jozef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia

Departments of PM&R and Division of Neuroscience, Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology,   Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
TX 77030, USA

Bioinformatics, in press

ABSTRACT

Motivation: Genetic networks are often used in the analysis of biological 
phenomena. In classical genetics, they are constructed manually from 
experimental data on mutants. The field lacks formalism to guide such 
analysis, and accounting for all the data becomes complicated when large 
amounts of data are considered.

Results: We have developed GenePath, an intelligent assistant that automates 
the analysis of genetic data. GenePath employs expert-defined patterns to 
uncover gene relations from the data, and uses these relations as constraints 
in the search for a plausible genetic network. GenePath formalizes genetic 
data analysis, facilitates the consideration of all the available data in a 
consistent manner, and the examination of the large number of possible 
consequences of planned experiments. It also provides an explanation 
mechanism that traces every finding to the pertinent data.

Availability: GenePath can be accessed at http://genepath.org.

Contact: gadi@bcm.tmc.edu

Supplementary information: Supplementary material is available at 
http://genepath.org/bi-supp.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Tail chimeras of Dictyostelium myosin II support cytokinesis and other 
myosin II activities but not full development

Shi Shu1, Xiong Liu1, Carole A. Parent 2, Taro Q. P. Uyeda3, and Edward D. 
Korn*1 

1 Laboratory of Cell Biology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, 
and 2 Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology, National Cancer Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892 and 3Gene Function Research 
Center, Tsukuba Central #4, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science 
and Technology (AIST), Higashi 1-1-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8562, Japan

*Author for correspondence (e-mail: edk@nih.gov)
Short title: In vivo activities of myosin II tail chimeras
Key words: myosin II; cytokinesis; chemotaxis; development; Con A capping.

Journal of Cell Science, in press

SUMMARY

Dictyostelium lacking myosin II cannot grow in suspension culture, develop 
beyond the mound stage or cap concanavalin A receptors and chemotaxis is 
impaired.  Recently, we showed that the actin-activated MgATPase activity 
of myosin chimeras in which the tail domain of Dictyostelium myosin II heavy 
chain is replaced by the tail domain of either Acanthamoeba or chicken 
smooth muscle myosin II is unregulated and about 20 times higher than 
wild-type myosin.  The Acanthamoeba chimera forms short bipolar filaments 
similar to, but shorter than, filaments of Dictyostelium myosin, and the 
smooth muscle chimera forms much larger side-polar filaments.  We now find 
that the Acanthamoeba chimera expressed in myosin null cells localizes to 
the periphery of vegetative amoeba similarly to wild-type myosin but the 
smooth muscle chimera is heavily concentrated in a single cortical patch. 
Despite their different tail sequences and filament structures and different 
localization of the smooth muscle chimera in interphase cells, both chimeras 
support growth in suspension culture and concanavalin A capping and co-
localize with the Con A cap but the Acanthamoeba chimera subsequently 
disperses more slowly than wild-type myosin and the smooth muscle chimera 
apparently not at all.  Both chimeras also partially rescue chemotaxis. 
However, neither supports full development.  Thus, neither regulation of 
myosin activity, nor regulation of myosin polymerization nor bipolar 
filaments is required for many functions of Dictyostelium myosin II and 
there may be no specific sequence required for localization of myosin to 
the cleavage furrow.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Macromolecular Architecture in Eukaryotic Cells Visualized by Cryo-Electron 
Tomography 
 
Ohad Medalia, Igor Weber, Achilleas S. Frangakis, Guenther Gerisch
and Wolfgang Baumeister

Max-Planck-Institut fuer Biochemie, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany

Science, in press.

Abstract

Electron tomography of vitrified cells is a non-invasive 3-dimensional 
imaging technique which opens up new vistas for exploring the supramolecular 
organization of the cytoplasm. We applied this technique to Dictyostelium 
cells focusing on the actin cytoskeleton. In actin networks reconstructed 
without prior removal of membranes or extraction of soluble proteins, the 
crosslinking of individual microfilaments, their branching angles and 
membrane attachment sites can be analyzed. At a resolution of 5 to 6 nm, 
single macromolecules with distinct shapes, such as the 26S proteasome, 
can be identified in an unperturbed cellular environment. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Purification and Renaturation of Dictyostelium Recombinant Alkaline 
Phosphatase by Continuous Elution Electrophoresis

Muatasem Ubeidat and Charles L. Rutherford

Biology Department, Molecular and Cellular Biology Section, Virginia 
Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA 24061-0406


Protein Expression and Purification, In Press

Abstract

A 1583 bp fragment of Dictyostelium alp cDNA (94% of the gene) was cloned in 
pET32a+.  The enzyme was expressed in an inactive form in the inclusion body 
of the expression host BL21-CodonPlus"!(DE3)-RIL. The recombinant ALP 
constituted more than 50% of the total protein in the inclusion body and 
25-30% of the total protein in the expression host after 3 h induction with 
IPTG at 37 C.  A continuous elution polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis 
procedure was used to purify the recombinant enzyme.  This technique 
yielded a homogenous protein that retained enzymatic activity after dialysis 
without further treatment.  A yield of 5 mg per liter of culture broth was 
obtained with a specific activity of approximately 0.7 nmol/min/mg of 
protein (0.7 mU/mg).  Immunoinhibition studies using a polyclonal antibody 
produced against the recombinant protein showed complete inhibition of 
enzymatic activity when the enzyme was preincubated with the antibody at a 
1: 1000 dilution.  The enzyme exhibited a pH optimum of approximately 9.0.  
The substrate specificity indicated that the Dictyostelium enzyme is a 
typical broad range alkaline phosphatase.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 19, number 8]

 
