Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 19, number 7
September 21, 2002

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at DictyBase--http://dictybase.org.


=============
  Abstracts
=============

Electron microscopy of actin rods and bundles in Dictyostelium discoideum by 
high-pressure freezing

Masazumi Sameshima1*, Yoshiro Kishi1, Masako Osumi2, Dana Mahadeo3, and David
A. Cotter3

1Electron Microscopy Center, The Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, Tokyo Metropolitan Organization for Medical Research, 3-18-22 
Honkomagome, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8613, Japan, 2Department of Chemical and 
Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, Japan Women's University, Bunkyo-ku, 
Tokyo 112-8681, Japan, and 3Department of Biological Sciences, University of 
Windsor, Windsor, Ontario N9B 3P4, Canada

J Electron Microscopy, in press.

Abstract

A new type of actin rods comprising actin tubules appear in dormant spores 
of Dictyostelium discoideum. A combination of high-pressure freezing and 
freeze-substitution (high-pressure freezing) is an effective method for 
analyzing structures of the actin rods appeared. However, the rods in the 
nucleus were occasionally observed in an amorphous state using this method. 
Also in the case of actin bundles formed in the nucleus of vegetative cells 
exposed to dimethyl sulfoxide, actin filaments seemed to be embedded in 
matrices. The karyoplasm of spores fixed by high-pressure freezing appeared 
to be denser than that obtained by other methods. Soluble materials may be 
efficiently retained in the nucleus, and so actin tubules or actin filaments 
embedded in those materials may result in hazy images of actin rods and 
bundles.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The costs and benefits of being a chimera

Kevin R Foster, Angelo Fortunato, Joan E Strassmann and David C Queller

Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Rice University MS 170
6100 Main, Houston Texas, 77005 USA

Proceedings of the Royal Society, Series B, in press.

Summary

Most multicellular organisms are uniclonal. This is hypothesized to be 
because uniclonal organisms function better than chimeras (non-clonal 
organisms), due to reduced levels of internal genetic conflict.  We tested 
this idea using the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum. When starving, 
the normally solitary amoebae aggregate to form a differentiated 
multicellular slug that migrates towards light and forms a fruiting body, 
facilitating the dispersal of spores. We added 107 amoebae to petri plates 
containing 1, 2, 5 or 10 clones mixed together. We found an intrinsic cost 
to chimerism: chimeric slugs moved significantly less far than uniclonal 
slugs of the same size.  However, in nature joining with other clones to 
form a chimera should increase slug size, and larger slugs travel farther. 
We incorporated this size effect into a second experiment by giving chimeras 
more cells than single clones (uniclonal got 106 cells, 2-clone chimeras got 
2x106 cells and so on). The uniclonal treatments then simulated a clone in a 
mixture that refuses to form chimeras. In this experiment, chimeras moved 
significantly further than the uniclonal slugs, in spite of the intrinsic 
cost.  Thus, chimerism is costly, which may be why it evolves so seldom, 
but in D. discoideum the benefits of large size appear to compensate. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 19, number 7]

 
