Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 15, number 1
July 8, 2000

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

==============
  Abstracts
==============
Efficient control of gene expression by a tetracycline-dependent
transactivator in single Dictyostelium discoideum cells.

Mieke Blaauw, Maarten H.K. Linskens and Peter J.M. van Haastert
Cell Engineering Facility GBB, Department of Biochemistry, University of
Groningen,  Nijenborgh 4, 9747 AG Groningen, The Netherlands

Gene, in press.

Abstract

We established a tetracycline-regulated gene expression system that
tightly controls expression of genes in Dictyostelium discoideum. The
control elements are contained in two plasmid vectors, one being an
integrated plasmid encoding a chimeric tetracycline-controlled
transcriptional activator protein (tTAs*). The second component is an
extra-chromosomal plasmid harboring the gene of interest preceded by an
inducible promoter. This promotor contains a tetracycline-responsive
element, which is the binding site for tTAs*. Tetracycline prevents
tTAs* from binding to the tetracycline-responsive element, rendering the
promoter virtually silent. In the absence of tetracycline, tTAs* binds
to its target sequence and strongly induces gene expression. The
kinetics of activation and repression of the system were monitored using
luciferase as a reporter. The results reveal efficient inhibition of
gene expression by low concentrations of tetracycline and an induction
of gene expression by several orders of magnitude within a few hours
after removal of tetracycline. Green fluorescent protein (GFP) provided
information about the effects of modulation of the tetracycline
concentration on gene expression, at the single cell level, using
fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS). We also report that not all
cells in a clonal population express the reporter gene.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mutant Rac1B Expression in Dictyostelium: Effects on Morphology, Growth, 
Endocytosis, Development, and the Actin Cytoskeleton

Stephen J. Palmieri1, Thomas Nebl1*, Robert K. Pope1*, David J.Seastone2, 
Enkyung Lee3, Edward H. Hinchcliffe1, Greenfield Sluder1, David Knecht3, 
James Cardelli2, and Elizabeth J. Luna1

1Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
377 Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 01605

2Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Feist-Weiller Cancer Center, 
Louisiana State University Medical Center, Shreveport, LA 71130

3Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Connecticut, 
Storrs, CT 06269


*T. Nebl and R. K. Pope contributed equally to this work.

Cell Motility and the Cytoskeleton, in press.

SUMMARY

Rac1 is a small G-protein in the Ras superfamily that has been implicated 
in the control of cell growth, adhesion, and the actin-based cytoskeleton. 
To investigate the role of Rac1 during motile processes, we have established 
Dictyostelium cell lines that conditionally overexpress epitope-tagged 
Dictyostelium discoideum wild-type Rac1B (DdRac1B) or a mutant DdRac1B 
protein. Expression of endogenous levels of myc- or GFP-tagged wild-type 
DdRac1B had minimal effect on cellular morphologies and behaviors. By 
contrast, expression of a constitutively active mutant (G12ÆV or Q61ÆL) 
or a dominant negative mutant (T17ÆN) generated amoebae with characteristic 
cellular defects. The morphological appearance of actin-containing structures, 
intracellular levels of F-actin, and cellular responses to chemoattractant 
closely paralleled the amount of active DdRac1B, indicating a role in 
upregulating actin cytoskeletal activities. Expression of any of the 
three mutants inhibited cell growth and cytokinesis, and delayed multicellular 
development, suggesting that DdRac1B plays important regulatory role(s) during 
these processes. No significant effects were observed on binding or internalization 
of latex beads in suspension or on intracellular membrane trafficking. Cells 
expressing DdRac1B-G12V exhibited defects in fluid-phase endocytosis and the 
longest developmental delays; DdRac1B-Q61L produced the strongest cytokinesis 
defect; and DdRac1B-T17N generated intermediate phenotypes. These conditionally-
expressed DdRac1B proteins should facilitate the identification and 
characterization of the Rac1 signaling pathway in an organism that is amenable 
to both biochemical and molecular genetic manipulations.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Spatial and Temporal Expression of a Polysphondylium Spore-specific Gene.

Keqin Y. Gregg & Edward C. Cox

333 Moffett Laboratories, Department of Molecular Biology, University, 
Princeton, New Jersey 08544

Developmental Biology, in press.

SUMMARY

In the cellular slime mold Polysphondylium spherical masses of cells are 
periodically released from the base of the culminating sorogen.  These 
whorls undergo a morphogenetic transformation from spherical to radial 
symmetry, marked by the early emergence of a radially symmetric prepattern 
on the whorl surface.  In previous experiments, morphogenesis was followed 
by observing prestalk cell markers.  Here we describe the isolation and 
characterization of a spore coat gene whose expression pattern is the 
negative image of the prestalk pattern.  To study the molecular mechanism 
of sp-45 gene regulation, we have cloned and analyzed the sp-45 promoter.  
Deletion analysis localized a single positive regulatory element (PRE) to 
a 106 bp fragment between positions -246 and –352 of the upstream coding 
sequence.  This fragment can be further divided into a promoter proximal 
and promoter distal PRE and a 29 bp sequence between them.  The distal 
PRE can regulate prespore expression when fused to a nonfunctioning basal 
promoter. The distal PRE contains two adjacent essential elements, a Gr 
box (GTGATATAGTGG) and a TA box (TAATATATT).  Each element can drive 
prespore cell specific reporter gene expression independently when 
incorporated into a nonfunctional promoter.  Our results also show that 
prespore cell-specific gene expression is solely under positive regulation, 
with no evidence for spore-specific enhancers or cis-acting negative 
regulatory elements.  By fusing GFP to the C-terminus of sp-45, we have 
demonstrated that the graded gene expression of SP45 in the sorogen is 
regulated by a sequence lying within the sp-45 coding sequence. The temporal 
and spatial expression pattern of this protein, taken together with the 
prestalk expression pattern, demonstrates unambiguously that the radial 
symmetries that emerge in the whorl are established by a system of positional 
coordinates, and that cell sorting plays little if any role in this process.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Pictures in Cell Biology, The Dictyostelium fruiting body – a stucture of 
cells and cellulose

Supriya Srinivasan, Hannah Alexander and Stephen Alexander

Division of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 
65211-7400

Accepted, Trends in Cell Biology, August  2000

The Dictyostelium fruiting body is featured along with a descritption of 
its biology.
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Molecular basis for resistance to the anticancer drug cisplatin in 
Dictyostelium

Guochun Li 1, Hannah Alexander1, Natalie Schneider2  and Stephen Alexander 1

1 Division of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 
65211-7400 and 2 Max-Planck Institut fur Biochemie, D-82152 Martinsried, 
Germany

Accepted Microbiology

ABSTRACT

  The efficacy of the widely used chemotherapeutic drug cisplatin is 
limited by the occurrence of drug-resistant tumor cells.  To fully 
exploit the potential of this drug in cancer therapy, it is 
imperative to understand the molecular basis of cisplatin resistance. 
Using an insertional mutagenesis technique in cells of Dictyostelium 
discoideum, we have identified six genes which are involved in 
cisplatin resistance.  None of these genes have been previously 
linked to resistance to this drug.  Several of these genes encode 
proteins that are involved in signal transduction pathways which 
regulate cell death, cell proliferation or gene regulation.  The 
resistance of these mutant strains is specific for cisplatin since 
deletion of these genes does not confer resistance to other DNA 
damaging agents.  Significantly, the disruption of three of these 
genes, encoding the sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase, the regA cAMP 
phosphodiesterase and a phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate 5-kinase, 
also results in abnormalities in the multicellular development of 
this organism, although there is no change in the rate of mitotic 
cell growth.  This study identified previously unsuspected molecular 
pathways which function in the cellular response to cisplatin and are 
required for normal morphogenesis, and underscores the complexity of 
the cellular response to cisplatin.  These pathways provide potential 
targets for modulating the response to this important drug.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) and Epitope Tag Fusion Vectors for 
Dictyostelium discoideum.

Stephanie Levi, Mark Polyakov, and Thomas T. Egelhoff*
Department of Physiology and Biophysics
Case Western Reserve School of Medicine
Cleveland, OH 44106-4970     USA

IN PRESS, PLASMID

We have constructed expression vectors for Dictyostelium discoideum which 
encode a green fluorescent protein (GFP) sequence upstream of a 
multicloning site for introduction of sequences of interest.  Insertion of 
cDNAs into the multicloning site results in expression of fusion protein 
bearing an amino or carboxyl-terminal GFP tag which can be used for 
fluorescent localization studies in Dictyostelium cells.  A parallel 
construct fuses a FLAG epitope tag at the amino terminus of expressed 
protein.  Each fusion cartridge was placed in a  G418-resistance vector 
allowing either trans-activated Ddp2-based extrachromosomal replication, or 
in a vector allowing autonomous Ddp1-based replication.  Distinct 
differences in expression stability were observed in the two vector 
types.   When GFP expressing cells were analyzed by fluorescent microscopy, 
significant cell-to-cell variability in expression level was observed when 
expression was based on the Ddp2 vector, while less cell-to-cell variation 
in expression level was observed when the Ddp1 backbone was used for 
expression.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 15, number 1]
