Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 15, number 8
October 21, 2000

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty"


==============
  Abstracts
==============

Role of esterase gp70 and its influence on growth and development of
Dictyostelium discoideum

Aidong Yuan and Catherine P. Chia

School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, N
eraska 68588-0118, USA

Experimental Cell Research, in press

ABSTRACT:

Gp70 is an esterase originally called crystal protein because of its 
presence in crystalline structures in aggregation-competent Dictyostelium 
discoideum cells. Although postulated to break down spore coats, the 
function of gp70 in vivo was incompletely investigated. Our 
immunolocalization and biochemical studies of vegetative D. discoideum 
amoebae show that gp70 was recruited to phagosomes and found in lysosomes. 
Purified gp70 was effective at hydrolyzing napthyl substrates with acyl 
chains typical of lipids and lipopolysaccharides, indicating that the gp70 
was involved in digesting endocytosed molecules. The activity of purified 
gp70 was inhibited by reductants that retarded its eletrophoretic mobility, 
and verified the presence of intramolecular disulfide bonds predicted by 
its amino acid sequence. Compared to wild type cells, cells overexpressing 
gp70 were more phagocytically active, had shorter generation times and 
produced more fruiting bodies per unit area, while cells lacking gp70 
were phagocytically less active with longer doubling times, developed 
more slowly, and had significantly fewer fruiting bodies per unit area. 
Consistent with the phenotype of a disrupted metabolism, a third of the 
gp70-minus cells were large and multinucleated. Together, these results 
indicated that despite its crystalline appearance, gp70 was an active 
esterase involved in both the growth and development of D. discoideum. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Novel Actin Cytoskeleton: Actin Tubules 

Masazumi Sameshima1, Yoshiro Kishi1, Masako Osumi2, Dana Mahadeo3, and 
David A. Cotter3

1Electron Microscopy Center, The Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, Tokyo Metropolitan Organization for Medical Research, 3-18-22 
Honkomagome, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8613, Japan. 
2Department of Chemical and Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, Japan 
Women's University, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 112-8681, Japan.
3Department of Biological Sciences, University of Windsor, 401 Sunset 
Avenue, Windsor, Ontario, N9B 3P4, Canada.

Cell Structure and Function, in press.

ABSTRACT: 

   In spores of Dictyostelium discoideum three-actin filaments are bundled 
to form a novel tubular structure and the tubules are then organized into 
rods. The tubular structures we will term actin tubules. Actin tubules are 
reconstructed from the supernatant of spore homogenates, while the usual 
actin filaments were bundled after incubation of supernatants from growing 
cells. Alpha-actinin, ABP-120 and EF-1 alpha are not essential for rod 
formation. Cofilin is a component of the cytoplasmic rods but few cofilin 
molecules are included in the nuclear rods. The viability of spores lacking 
actin rods is very low, and the spore shape is round instead of capsular. 
The rods can be fragmented by pressure, indicating that the rods may be 
effective in absorbing physical pressure. The complex organization of actin 
filaments, actin tubules and rods may be required for spores to achieve 
complete dormancy and maintain viability.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The role of DIF-1 signalling in Dictyostelium development

Christopher R. L. Thompson and Robert R. Kay

MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 2QH, England

Molecular Cell, in press

Abstract

We have constructed a mutant blocked in the biosynthesis of DIF-1, a
chlorinated signal molecule proposed to induce differentiation of both
major prestalk cell types formed during Dictyostelium development.
Surprisingly, the mutant still forms slugs retaining one prestalk cell
type, the pstA cells, and can form mature stalk cells.  However, the other
major prestalk cell type, the pstO cells, is missing.  Normal pstO cell
differentiation, and their patterning in the slug, is restored by
development on a uniform concentration of DIF-1.  We conclude that pstO and
pstA cells are in fact induced by separate signals and that DIF-1 is the
pstO inducer.  Positional information, in the form of DIF-1 gradients, is
evidently not required for pstO cell induction.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 15, number 8]
