Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 15, number 9
October 28, 2000

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty"


==============
  Abstracts
==============

Cell cycle phase, cellular Ca2+and development in Dictyostelium discoideum

M. Azhar1, P. K. Kennady2, Gopal Pande2, Michael Espiritu3, Wesley Holloman, 
Derrick Brazill, Richard H. Gomer3 and Vidyanand Nanjundiah1*

1 Department of Molecular Reproduction, Development and Genetics, Indian 
Institute of Science, Bangalore-560012, India.
2 Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad-500007, India.
3 Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77251-1892, USA.

International Journal of Developmental Biology, in press.


In Dictyostelium discoideum the initial differentiation of cells is 
regulated by the phase of the cell cycle at starvation.Cells that are 
between S and early G2 at starvation (or with a low DNA content) have 
relatively high cellular Ca2+ and display a prestalk tendency, while 
cells in mid to late G2 (or with a  high DNA content) have relatively 
low levels of Ca2+ and display a prespore tendency.  As expected on the 
basis of this correlation, cell cycle inhibitors influence the proportions 
of amoebae containing high or low Ca2+.  However, in the mutant rtoA, 
which upon differentiation gives rise to  many more  stalk cells than 
spores (compared  to the wild type),  initial cell-type choice is 
independent of cell cycle phase at starvation (Wood et al., 1996).   
In contrast to the wild type,  a disproportionately large fraction of 
rtoA  amoebae fall in the high Ca2+ class, possibly due to an altered 
ability of this mutant to transport Ca2+.  These results show that Ca2+   
is yet another aspect of early functional heterogeneity between cells of 
D. discoideum.  The list of such aspects keeps growing and, as of  today, 
includes cell size (Bonner et al; 1971), nutritional status (Leach et al; 
1973), cell cycle phase (McDonald and Durston, 1984;  Weijer et al; 1984),  
sequestered Ca 2+  (Azhar et al; 1996) and the sensitivity of freshly 
starved amoebae to DIF (Azhar et al; 1997).  From an evolutionary point 
of view, these  can be thought of as so many correlates  of the phenotype  
with relative cellular fitness (what we have previously termed 'qualities'
; Atzmony et al; 1995). Phenotypic selection at the level of the individual 
cell ensures that following aggregation, high-quality amoebae display traits  
of prespore cells on the whole and low-quality amoebae display prestalk 
traits  (again, on the whole).  Seen thus, it appears  that while the 
notion of morphogens and positional information is a useful way of 
describing collective behaviour during the later stages of differentiation 
and pattern formation in D. discoideum, the essence of that behaviour must 
be sought in the myriad and interlocking ways in which cells differ from 
each other at all stages of the life cycle.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Phg1p: A Nine-Transmembrane Protein Superfamily Member
Involved in Dictyostelium Adhesion and Phagocytosis

Sophie Cornillon, Emmanuel Pech, Mohammed Benghezal, Kissia Ravanel, Erin
Gaynor, François Letourneur, Franz Brückert and Pierre Cosson

Université de Genève, Centre Médical Universitaire, Département de
Morphologie, 1 rue Michel Servet, CH-1211 Genève 4, Switzerland

J. Biol. Chem., In press

To identify the molecular mechanisms involved in phagocytosis, we generated
random insertion mutants of Dictyostelium discoideum and selected two
mutants defective for phagocytosis. Both represented insertions in the same
gene, named PHG1. This gene encodes a polytopic membrane protein with an
N-terminal lumenal domain and nine potential transmembrane segments.
Homologous genes can be identified in many species, however their function
is yet to be elucidated. Disruption of PHG1 caused a selective defect in
phagocytosis of latex beads and E. coli, but not K. aerogenes bacteria.
This defect in phagocytosis was caused by a decrease in the adhesion of
mutant cells to phagocytosed particles. These results indicate that the
Phg1 protein is involved in the adhesion of Dictyostelium to various
substrates, a crucial event of phagocytosis and demonstrate the usefulness
of a genetic approach to dissect the molecular events involved in the
phagocytic process.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Novel Aromatic Substances, Dictyomedin A and B, from Dictyostelium Cellular
Slime Molds and Their Inhibitory Effects on Dictyostelium Development

Yoshiaki Takaya1, Haruhisa Kikuchi1, Yuichi Terui1, Jun Komiya, Yasuo
Maeda2, Akira Ito3 and Yoshiteru Oshima1*

1Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, Aoba, Sendai
980-8578, 2Biological Institute, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku
University, Aoba, Sendai 980-8578 and 3Kyorin Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd.,
Kanda-Surugadai, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-0062, Japan

Tetrahedron Lett. (in press)

Abstract

To elucidate the diversity of secondary metabolites of Dictyostelium
cellular slime molds and search for physiologically active substances
affecting their development, we investigated the constituents of D. medium.
>From the methanol extract of its fruit body, we obtained two novel aromatic
compounds named dictyomedin A (1) and B (2), and their structures were
elucidated by means of physicochemical data.  Biological evaluation of the
compounds showed that they delayed the differentiation of D. discoideum
cells.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Efficient transformation of Dictyostelium discoideum with a particle inflow 
gun

Birgit Wetterauer1*, Klaus Salger1, Petra Demel2
and Hans-Ulrich Koop2

1 Zoologisches Institut der Ludwig Maximilians-Universitaet, Luisenstraße
14, 80333 Muenchen, Germany
2 Botanisches Institut der Ludwig Maximilians-Universitaet, Menzingerstraße
67, 80683 Muenchen, Germany

BBA, Section: Molecular Cell Research

We report experiments to transform Dictyostelium discoideum  using a simple
home made particle gun. Stable transformants were obtained at frequencies
of up to 2500 clones/µg DNA. This is five times more than we achieve with
the same vector using electroporation protocols. We also show that the
particle inflow gun can be used for analysis of developmentally regulated
gene expression in a transient assay.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Identification and characterisation of DdPDE3, a cGMP-selective 
phosphodiesterase from Dictyostelium


Hidekazu Kuwayama, Helena Snippe, Mari Derks, Jeroen Roelofs 
and Peter J.M. Van Haastert


GBB, Department of Biochemistry, University of Groningen, 
Nijenborgh 4, 9747 AG Groningen, the Netherlands


Biochemical Journal, in press


Abstract


In Dictyostelium cAMP and cGMP play important functions as first 
and second messengers in chemotaxis and developments. Two 
cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases (DdPDE 1 and 2) have been 
identified previously, an extracellular dual-specificity enzyme and 
an intracellular cAMP-specific enzyme (encoded by the psdA and 
regA gene, respectively). Biochemical data suggest the presence 
of at least one cGMP-specific PDE that is activated by cGMP. 
Using bioinformatics we identified a partial sequence in the 
Dictyostelium EST database that shows a high degree of amino 
acid sequence identity with mammalian PDE catalytic domains 
(DdPDE3). The deduced amino acid sequence of a full-length 
DdPDE3 cDNA isolated in this study predicts a 60 kDa protein with 
a 300 amino acid C-terminal PDE catalytic domain, which is 
preceded by about 200 amino acids that are rich in asparagine and 
glutamine residues.  Expression of the DdPDE3 catalytic domain 
in E. coli shows that the enzyme has Michaelis-Menten kinetics 
and a higher affinity for cGMP (Km = 0.22 microM) than for cAMP 
(Km = 145 microM); cGMP does not stimulate enzyme activity. The 
enzyme requires divalent cations for activity; Mn2+ is preferred to 
Mg2+ , whereas Ca2+ yields no activity. DdPDE3 is inhibited by 3-
isobutyl-1-methyl-xanthine (IBMX) with an IC50 of about 60 mM. 
Overexpression of DdPDE3 catalytic domain  in Dictyostelium 
confirms these kinetic properties without indications for its 
activation by cGMP. The properties of DdPDE3 resemble those of 
mammalian PDE9 that also shows the highest sequence similarity 
within the catalytic domains. DdPDE3 is the first cGMP-selective 
PDE identified in lower eukaryotes. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

EXPRESSION AND ONE STEP PURIFICATION OF PLASMODIUM PROTEINS IN DICTYOSTELIUM

Miguel X. van Bemmelen1, Carole Beghdadi-Rais 2, Chantal Desponds+, Esmeralda 
Vargas3, Sócrates Herrera3, Christophe D. Reymond1 and Nicolas Fasel2

1 Institut de Biologie Cellulaire et de Morphologie, Université de Lausanne, 
Rue du Bugnon 9, CH-1005 Lausanne, Switzerland
2 Institut de Biochimie, Université de Lausanne, ch. des Boveresses 155, 
CH-1066 Epalinges, Switzerland
3 Sección del Immunología, Facultad de Salud, Universidad del Valle, Cali, 
Colombia

Molecular and Biochemical Parasitology, In Press

Abstract

Nearly full length CSP from Plasmodium falciparum, the C-terminal fragments 
from both P. falciparum and P. yoelii CSP and a fragment comprising 351 amino 
acids of P.vivax MSP1 were expressed in the slime mold Dictyostelium 
discoideum. Discoidin-tag expression vectors allowed both high yields of these 
proteins and their purification by a nearly single-step procedure. We exploited 
the galactose binding activity of Discoidin Ia to separate the fusion proteins 
by affinity chromatography on Sepharose-4B columns. Inclusion of a thrombin 
recognition site allowed cleavage of the Discoidin-tag from the fusion protein. 
Partial secretion of the protein was obtained via an ER independent pathway, 
whereas routing the recombinant proteins to the ER resulted in glycosylation 
and retention. Yields of proteins were ranging from 0.08 to 3 mg per Litre 
depending on the protein sequence and the purification conditions. The 
recognition of purified MSP1 by sera from P. vivax malaria patients was 
used to confirm the native conformation of the protein expressed in 
Dictyostelium. The simple purification procedure described here, based 
on Sepharose-4B, should facilitate the expression and the large-scale 
purification of various Plasmodium polypeptides. 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 15, number 9]
