Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 15, number 10
November 18, 2000

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page
"http://dicty.cmb.northwestern.edu/dicty"

Editors note:  The following is a draft proposal developed by a 
committee constituted at the Dundee Dicty 2000 meeting to develop a
proposal for genetic nomenclature.  The committee is anxious for
feedback.  To facilitate the widest possible involvement of the community
in this important discussion, please send your comments to the email 
server address: dicty@listserv.it.northwestern.edu.  

==============================================
  Proposal for standard genetic nomenclature
==============================================

Dictyostelium Genetic Nomenclature and Strain designations
Draft. Nov 15, 2000.

Introduction 

The purpose of the proposed nomenclature system is to give a compact, 
accurate description of Dictyostelium strains and loci.  We present 
this proposal to stimulate the universal adoption of a uniform nomenclature 
that we believe will facilitate everyone’s work in the long term. 

Have you ever received a strain marked ‘geneX-KO’, perhaps through a third 
party, and not been able to tell what the parent is, what the selectable 
marker is, what manner of KO it has, or which laboratory made it?  This 
situation can get a lot worse, as strains with multiple KO’s are made in 
a variety of backgrounds, as interaction genetics by library complementation 
leads to the re-appearance of chemical mutants, and as gene replacement 
gives us a variety of temperature-sensitive and dominant alleles of known 
genes.  Several laboratories have noticed effects of genetic background 
on mutant phenotype made in Ax2, Ax3, DH1, and so on.  As more quantitative 
measures of phenotype are used this is going to become an increasing 
problem.  Finally, we hope that a Strain Repository will be established 
to preserve and distribute mutant strains.  This will only be feasible if 
the strains in it can be accurately described and traced.  For these 
reasons, we feel that it is essential to have a uniform nomenclature 
system that everybody can use and which will help in the organization 
and distribution of strains in a repository.

There are two conflicting pressures on gene nomenclature: the need to 
be compact and unambiguous, mainly for purposes within the field, and 
the need to be accessible across fields.  The Demerec nomenclature, 
which is already in use in the field, is compact and accurate. We 
recommend that Demerec nomenclature be adopted, but with suitable 
modifications. Many Demerec gene abbreviations are not necessarily 
recognizable to outside workers and they may not connect Dictyostelium 
work to other work on similar, conserved genes.  One way of bridging 
this gap is to use the ‘standard’ name for a protein and gene where 
necessary in descriptive sections of papers or grants.  Thus we have 
the GSK3, STATa, PI3K proteins, and can talk about their genes as the 
GSK3, STATa genes, if we wish.  But these genes will also have Demerec 
names gskA, dstA etc.  By putting the ‘standard’ name in the Title, 
Keywords, Abstract, Text and Figure legends of a paper, we can ensure 
that it is accessible to computer searching as well as to readers outside 
the field. The formal gene names will be in the Materials and Methods, 
strain genotypes and various gene index databases that will provide the 
"Rosetta Stone" for all names. Although this suggestion leads to 
redundancy and some possibility of confusion, we feel that it reflects 
the reality of the gradual merger of gene naming systems drawn from 
different organisms and from biochemistry, which is the inevitable 
result of the conservation of many genes among organisms.  It also 
reflects the reality of usage by many Dictyostelium laboratories.

Strain naming is done for purposes within the field and so does not 
suffer from the same conflicts as gene naming.  However we feel that 
it would be useful if it could be done in a standard way which indicates 
the laboratory of origin.  This is the standard practice in most 
bacterial and yeast genetics laboratories. In our field, the practice 
for many laboratories is to use a 2- or 3-letter code unique to each 
laboratory, which is used to designate all of their strains.  A list 
of these codes will be available on the web and laboratories can 
‘register’ new ones through the proposed nomenclature committee.

We recommend that a strain table be included in papers that employ 
multiple strains. Thus, some of the more cumbersome names proposed 
below should be included once in the table and a shorter form of the 
named used in the paper (with reference to the Table the first time 
the abbreviated name is used).  In a few years, if we can develop a 
strain repository, it will be possible to have a column in such a 
table that has a repository number for each of the most important 
strains in a paper. This device will improve the ability of workers 
in the field and outside the field to locate original strains, obtain 
them from a strain repository, and to repeat experiments with rigor.

We expect Dictyostelium to have about 10,000 genes, and the sequence 
for most of these should be available soon through the sequencing 
projects.  Once these have been annotated they will be given temporary 
names (‘homologous to yeast gene YC1234’), which will be merged with 
the Demerec names, as more information becomes available.  Formal rules 
and requirements for naming or re-naming genes will be discussed by all 
at a future date, but we suggest that individuals name genes only after 
they have generated significant new information about a gene within 
the context of a formal publication.  Two obvious ways to do this 
would be to describe a mutation a given gene and report the results 
in a publication, or to compare a gene (or gene family) with genes 
in other species and publish those studies in a review article or 
as part of a primary research paper. 

The detailed recommendations of the nomenclature committee set up 
at the Dundee International Meeting are given below.  We also 
propose setting up a clearing house for registering gene names 
and laboratory strain codes.  For now, all laboratories with 
strain prefixes should inform Adam Kuspa so that the nomenclature 
committee can collate the information in the interim before a 
clearing house is established. Avoiding duplicate gene names may 
be difficult before the clearing house is set up, but curators 
of the large gene databases in Tsukuba, San Diego, Hinxton, Houston 
and Cologne/Jena should be able to offer some guidance. 

We welcome ideas and suggestions on this draft proposal, including 
missed references and suggestions for questions (and answers) under 
the FAQ section that will be attached to the final document.

Much of the committee’s discussion focused on how to name genes.   
Views on this point differed, so in composing the draft below the 
committee had to weigh the need to present a concrete proposal, with 
the desire to present possible variations and additions.  We made 
the decision to present the most compact gene nomenclature in the 
draft, but added an addendum at the end that expresses additions 
to the basic proposal which the committee also considered.  The 
body of the proposal was endorsed by the majority of the committee, 
while the addendum was supported by a minority.  

We thank Jacob Franke for suggestions and careful review of this 
draft.    

Adam Kuspa (Chairman)
Ludwig Eichinger
Robert R. Kay
Alan R. Kimmel
Hideko Urushihara
Richard Kessin (ex officio) Chairman, Dictyostelium Community 
  Organizing Committee. 


Genes 

Gene names should be devised to conform to the following conventions 
derived from Demerec et al. (1966).  A locus descriptor consisting 
of 3 italic letters, followed by a capital italicised letter to 
distinguish genes with the same descriptor that are related in a 
significant way.   Thus, related genes should have the same 3-letter 
descriptor and successive capital letters (rdeA, rdeB and rdeC; or 
tagA, tagB and tagC).  Gene names that do not follow these rules do 
exist (e.g. act6, act15, pyr5-6 and erk1), but the original naming 
authors can change any gene name, if they wish, by describing the 
name change in their next publication containing the gene and 
informing the clearinghouse.   For example,  "The spore coat protein 
gene cotB (formerly referred to as 'SP70') was introduced under the 
control of..." This change was made by Bill Loomis in 1990 (but not 
in these exact words).  In the absence of formal renaming, the system 
will retain all extant names.

Mutant alleles.  All necessary details about an allele should be 
published somewhere (for example in a strain table), but need not be 
carried in its name.  Since there are a large number of possible alleles 
of a gene, authors should use any unique allele name.  Since a one-, 
two-, three- or four-digit number cannot be expected to remain unique 
without considerable effort by a clearinghouse, more detailed names 
should be used. To indicate an allele, as opposed to another gene, 
allele names should be placed in parentheses and in italics following 
the gene name without a space, as in yakA(AK235) and yakA(AK800), which 
are two different insertion mutations in yakA named for the strain in 
which they were isolated.  Where the nature of the mutation is not known 
or only a single allele is relevant within a given document (paper or grant), 
a superscript minus sign should be used for brevity (regA-).  The use of 
superscripts to describe the general nature of an allele can be used, as 
in regA(AK202ts) or regAts, but should be limited to two or three  letters, 
e.g. ts, cs (cold sensitive), hc (high copy) or dn (dominant negative).  
Amino acid substitutions should be given as the old residue in single-letter 
code with its codon location followed by the new (mutant) amino acid, as in 
regA(D212A) which has an alanine in place of the aspartate at position 212. 
The amino acid change is an interpretation of what the gene will produce 
and refers to a protein so it is not put in italics.  Ax4 is the reference 
strain for the "wild-type" amino acid sequence within proteins since it 
will be the first strain sequenced. 

Proteins

A protein should be named after the gene encoding it by capitalizing 
the first letter and without the use of italics.  Thus, the protein 
encoded by regA is RegA, or RegA(D212A) in the case of a mutant protein.  
When naming a protein before its gene is cloned, one should keep the 
genetic nomenclature in mind.  For example, the name PSF for Clarke’s 
Pre-starvation Factor can easily be changed to "PsfA" when the psfA gene 
is identified, but "p38" would be more problematic and likely necessitate 
renaming the protein when the primary sequence is known.  

Phenotypes
No convention for describing phenotypes of Dictyostelium genes has been 
invoked, but when used they should not be italicized.  Three letter 
abbreviations of phenotypes can be used to name genes once the relevant 
genes are cloned, characterized and found to have a novel structure (e.g. 
tagA for the "tip-less aggregate" phenotype).  The following names should 
be used to indicate common drug resistance/sensitivity and nutrient 
auxotrophy/prototrophy. For clarity, relevant phenotypic markers should 
be included at the end of formal genotypes (no italics): 

neor (indicates a neomycin phosphotransferase gene is functional).
neos (for clarity, or when G418 selection on a neor strain is relaxed and 
      G418-sensitive strain is isolated). 
thy- (indicates thy1 is mutant and the strain requires thymidine). 
thy+ (used when a thy1 mutant has been complemented).
bsr  (indicates the blasticidin resistance gene bsr is present).
bss  (for clarity, or when bsr has been introduced but is non-functional).
ura+ (uracil independent. Note that this can be different from pyr5-6+).
ura- (most often used to indicate pyr5-6-).
foar (most often this will be redundant with ura-).
hygr (hygromycin resistance).
bler (bleomycin resistance).


Genotypes

Genotypes should describe the relevant genetic modifications present in a 
given strain. Genes listed in a genotype are considered to by mutant in 
some way.  Every genetic element described in a genotype (gene, plasmid, 
DNA fragment) should be separated by a comma.  To distinguish chromosomal 
loci from exogenous genes, every gene or construct contained on DNA that 
was introduced into cells by transformation should be listed within brackets 
regardless of whether that DNA is carried on a plasmid, integrated as a 
fragment or was amplified by replication once inside cells. 

Molecular genetic constructs

Reporter genes and gene fusions should be named with the relevant components 
separated by slashes and dashes to indicate DNA fusion, as follows.  
Typically, the components will be a promoter, a coding sequence or ORF 
encoding a reporter protein.  Promoters (± a few codons) should be separated 
from coding sequence by a slash (/) and coding sequences separated by dashes (-).  
So a Talin GFP fusion under the transcriptional control of a cotB promoter would 
be written: cotB/talA-gfp.   When a coding region is under the transcriptional 
control of the native promoter it could be written talA/talA-gfp to emphasize 
this, or simply written as talA-gfp.  Of course, the more commonly used GFP 
variant would be written talA-gfp(S65T).  

Constructs carried within cells should be described in the formal genotype of 
that strain and placed in brackets.   Thus, a cotB promoter b-galactosidase 
reporter construct in a mutant strain might have a formal genotype of 
"regA(AK202ts), p88d1[cotB/lacZ] neor", but could be shortened to 
"regA-[cotB/lacZ]" in the context of a sentence describing the strain’s 
properties in the results section of a paper.  Again, strain tables add clarity. 

Plasmids

Naturally occurring plasmids are named by a prefix indicating the genus and 
species, as in Ddp1. Derivatives of the natural plasmids and other shuttle 
vectors should be indicated with a lowercase "p" prefix (pDXA-3C). For genes 
on a plasmid, and any other gene that is introduced into a strain by experiment 
(see below), use the same naming system as for chromosomal genes, but placed 
within square brackets (e.g. pDneo67[act6/regA] to indicate a regA coding sequence 
fused to the promoter of the actin 6 gene on plasmid pDneo67).  

Strains

Strains available for distribution must have an unambiguous name, consisting 
of 2 or 3 capitals plus a unique serial number (e.g. HM1 or HTY217).  Labs or 
workers should always use the same capital prefixes or small group of prefixes.  
The prefixes are assigned by a clearinghouse upon request.  See Appendix 1 
for a current list of assigned strain prefixes.  In the past all lab designations 
started with either H (for haploid) or D (for diploid) and many of these strains 
are still in use.

Management.  A clearinghouse will be established to ensure that lab codes and 
gene names are not duplicated.  Until the 2001 international meeting in San Diego, 
the clearinghouse will be the nomenclature committee, headed by Adam Kuspa. Contact 
the committee through him via E-mail at akuspa@bcm.tmc.edu.  The membership of a 
standing nomenclature committee can be determined at the 2001 meeting. 

Frequently Asked Questions

When should genes be named?  In general, genes should be named after they are 
completely characterized structurally and after some functional information is 
obtained by mutation, expression, or by purification of a gene product.  Genes 
could also be named by virtue of their being nearly identical to another 
Dictyostelium gene product or a gene described in another species.  For example, 
50% amino acid identity from N to C terminus between a new Dictyostelium protein 
and a protein described in another species may be considered sufficient grounds 
for using the previously described gene name (suitably modified) for the 
Dictyostelium gene.  As a practical matter, the likely key decision point for 
naming a gene will come when it is time to submit a gene to a database 
(GenBank/DDBJ/EMBL).  Authors should be judicious about giving the sequence a 
name that they expect to use in publications since these databases are the way 
that many researchers first come in contact with a gene from another species.  
Nothing will be more confusing than to have genes named one way in GenBank and 
another way in the literature.

Will the nomenclature committee re-name genes that do not conform to Demerec?
No.  The original naming authors can formally re-name genes if they wish, as 
described above.  Future interspecies genome comparisons may require re-naming 
some genes, but the manner in which such issues will be dealt with is not 
presently clear.  

References

General: 

Demerec, M. et al., (1966). A proposal for a uniform nomenclature in bacterial 
genetics. Genetics 54:61-76.

Kay, R.R., W.F. Loomis and P.N. Devreotes (1998). Genetic Nomenclature Guide. 
Elsevier Science Ltd. London. pp S.5-S.6 (TIGS supplement)

Gene Lists:

DictyDB http://glamdring.ucsd.edu/others/dsmith/dictydb.html#C

Kuspa, A., D. Maghakian, P. Bergesch, and W.F. Loomis. 1992.  Physical mapping 
of genes to specific chromosomes in Dictyostelium discoideum. Genomics 13:49-61.

Loomis, W.F., D. Welker, J. Hughes, D. Maghakian, and A. Kuspa. 1995. Integrated 
maps of the chromosomes in Dictyostelium discoideum. Genetics 141:147-157.

Kuspa, A., and W.F. Loomis. 1996. Ordered yeast artificial chromosome clones 
representing the Dictyostelium discoideum genome.  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 
93:5562-5566.


Appendix 1. List of Known Strain Prefixes by Laboratory 

DP, NP and XP; P. Newell
HM and DM; R.R. Kay
HL, DL and DG; W.F. Loomis
GS; Gad Shaulsky
AK, V and W; A. Kuspa
KY; K. Yanagisawa
HU, DUK; K. Williams 
HUD, DUD; D. Welker 
HC, DCB; B. Coukell 
HPF, DPFP; P. Fisher 
HH, DH, HR (Kessin, Ennis)


Addendum:

	While we recognize that Demerec nomenclature is compact, accurate and 
uniform, we also realize that it is not necessarily accessible to other areas 
or systems. One problem with Demerec is that it is fixed at 3 letters and does 
not permit numbers or Greek letters. So STAT, GSK3, PI3K, and Gb are not 
accommodated by Demerec.

	 Many Demerec abbreviations are already used in Dictyostelium for 
genes that are conserved in other systems. Unfortunately, they may not be 
recognizable to outside workers or fail to be connected to similar, conserved 
genes in database searches. In such cases, the best way to bridge this gap is 
to use the standard universal (non-Demerec) name for a protein and gene where 
appropriate. Genes can thus be written directly as GSK3, STATa, PI3K, Gb (all 
in italics). These genes will also have Demerec names but, in such cases, the 
Demerec names will be relegated to Materials and Methods and Dictyostelium 
websites. In websites, the genes will be cross referenced to their universal 
(non-Demerec) name.

	For non-Demerec usage within manuscripts, etc. there can be a 
modification for clarity, based upon mammalian usage. Wild-type genes are 
denoted in capital italicized letters, (eg. PI3K), with mutants in lower 
case (eg pi3k).

	We recognize one major difficulty. There will be genes with Demerec 
names, but non-Demerec orthologs. The same gene will be called different 
names by different authors. For uniformity, the standard name should take 
preference.  Duality can be acknowledged parenthetically in an introduction. 
Situations already exist in Dictyostelium and other systems where identical 
genes have more than one name.



=========================
  Postdoctoral Position
=========================


POSTDOCTORAL POSITIONS IN FUNCTIONAL GENOMICS

Postdoctoral positions are available to work on the Dictyostelium 
functional genomics program at Baylor College of Medicine. 
Individuals interested in large-scale mutant characterization, 
expression arrays, genome sequence analysis or the development of 
data mining and visualization tools are invited to apply.  Baylor 
College of Medicine is part of the Texas Medical Center in Houston, 
one of the largest and most rapidly developing medical centers in 
the world.  Baylor offers competitive salaries and benefits as well 
as great employment opportunities for spouses.  We expect to fill 
several positions in 2001.  Candidates holding a Ph.D. degree, or 
equivalent, in relevant fields should submit a short description of 
research interests, cv and a list of 3 references to the appropriate 
faculty member listed below.

Adam Kuspa (Genome sequencing, Gene function)	akuspa@bcm.tmc.edu

Gad Shaulsky (Expression arrays, Gene function)	gadi@bcm.tmc.edu

John Halter (Computational modeling, data mining) jah@bcm.tmc.edu

Jeff Tollett (Large-scale phenotyping and
		expression profiling)		jtollett@bcm.tmc.edu

Chad Shaw (Statistical analyses and modeling)	cashaw@bcm.tmc.edu



==============
  Abstracts
==============

Adherens junctions and beta-catenin  mediated cell signalling in a  
non-metazoan organism

Mark J. Grimson, Juliet C. Coates , Jonathan P. Reynolds,  Mark Shipman 
Richard L. Blanton & Adrian J. Harwood

Nature (in press)

Abstract

Mechanical forces between cells play a major part in the organisation 
of animal tissues. Adherens junctions are an important component of these 
tissues, connecting cells via their actin cytoskeleton and allowing 
assembly of tensile structures. At least one adherens junction protein, 
beta-catenin, also acts as a signalling molecule, directly regulating 
gene expression. To date, adherens junctions have only been detected in 
metazoa, so to examine their evolutionary origins, we sought them outside 
the animal kingdom. The non-metazoan Dictyostelium discoideum forms a 
multicellular, differentiated structure. Here, we describe the discovery 
of actin-associated intercellular junctions in Dictyostelium. Furthermore, 
we have isolated a gene encoding a beta-catenin homologue, aardvark, which 
is a component of the junctional complex and, independently, is required 
for cell signalling. This is the first report of adherens junctions outside 
the animal kingdom and demonstrates that the dual role of beta-catenin in 
cell-cell adhesion and cell signalling evolved  prior to the origins of 
metazoa.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A genetic interaction between a ubiquitin-like protein and 
ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis in Dictyostelium discoideum.

Stefan  Pukatzki*, Herbert L. Ennis, and Richard H. Kessin
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Physicians & 
Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032.

* Present address: Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, 
Harvard Medical School, 200 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115.

Biochimica et Biophysica Acta, in press

Abstract

A ubiquitination factor, NosA, is essential for cellular 
differentiation in Dictyostelium discoideum. In the absence of nosA, 
development is blocked, resulting in a developmental arrest at the 
tight-aggregate stage, when cells differentiate into two precursor 
cell types, prespore and prestalk cells. Development is restored when 
a second gene, encoding the ubiquitin-like protein SonA, is 
inactivated in nosA-mutant cells. SonA has homology over its entire 
length to Dsk2 from Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a ubiquitin-like 
protein that is involved in the assembly of the spindle pole body. 
Dsk2 and SonA are both stable proteins that do not seem to be 
subjected to degradation via the ubiquitin pathway. SonA does not 
become ubiquitinated and the intracellular levels of SonA are not 
affected by the absence of NosA. The high degree of suppression 
suggests that SonA rescues most or all of the defects caused by the 
absence of nosA. We propose that NosA and SonA act in concert to 
control the activity of a developmental regulator that must be 
deactivated for cells to cross a developmental boundary.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Percolation clustering: a novel approach to the clustering of gene
expression patterns in Dictyostelium development.

Roman Sasik, Terry Hwa, Negin Iranfar, and William F. Loomis

Department of Physics and Division of Biology
University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA

Pacific Symp. Biocomputing (in press)

Abstract

We present a novel approach to the clustering of gene expression patterns
based on the mutual connectivity of the patterns. Unlike certain widely
used methods (e.g., self-organizing maps and K-means) which essentially
force gene expression data  into a fixed number of predetermined clustering
structures, our approach aims to reveal the natural tendency of the data to
cluster, in analogy to the physical phenomenon of percolation. The approach
is probabilistic in nature, and as such accommodates the possibility that
one gene participates in multiple clusters. The result is cast in terms of
the connectivity of each gene to a certain number of (significant)
clusters. A computationally efficient algorithm is developed to implement
our approach. Performance of the method is illustrated by clustering both
constructed data and gene expression data obtained from Dictyostelium
development.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

INDUCIBLE EXPRESSION OF EXOGENOUS GENES IN DICTYOSTELIUM DISCOIDEUM USING
THE RIBONUCLEOTIDE REDUCTASE PROMOTER

Pascale Gaudet1,2, Harry MacWilliams4 and Adrian Tsang1,2,3*

1Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, 2Centre for Structural and
Functional Genomics, 3Department of Biology, Concordia University, 1455 de
Maisonneuve Blvd. W., Montreal, Quebec, H3G 1M8, Canada
4Zoologisches Institut, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Luisenstrasse 14,
80333 München, Germany

Nucleic Acids Research, in press

ABSTRACT

We report here the development of a regulated gene expression system for
Dictyostelium discoideum based on the DNA-damage inducibility of the rnrB
gene. rnrB, which codes for the small subunit of the enzyme ribonucleotide
reductase, responds to DNA-damaging agents at all stages of the D.
discoideum life cycle. Doses that have little effect on development have
previously been shown to increase the level of the rnrB transcript by up to
15-fold. Here we show that all elements necessary for DNA-damage induction
are contained in a 450-bp promoter fragment. We used a fusion of the rnrB
promoter with the gene encoding GFP to demonstrate an up to 10-fold
induction at the RNA level, which appears in all aspects similar to the
induction of the endogenous rnrB transcript. Using a fusion with the lacZ
gene we observed an up to 7-fold induction at the protein level. These
results indicate that the rnrB promoter can be used to regulate the
expression of specific genes in D. discoideum. 
This controllable gene expression system provides the following new
characteristics: the induction is rapid, taking place in the order of
minutes and the promoter is responsive at all stages of the D. discoideum
life cycle. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 15, number 10]
