Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 15, number 5
September 2, 2000

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty"


==============
  Abstracts
==============

Tyrosine phosphorylation in plant movement

Kazuhisa Kameyama*†, Yoshiro Kishi*‡, Masanori Yoshimura†, 
Nobuyuki Kanzawa†, Masazumi Sameshima‡ & Takahide Tsuchiya†

†Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science and Technology, 
Sophia University, 7-1 Kioicho, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-8554, Japan
‡Department of Cell Biology, The Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of 
Medical Science, 3-18-22 Honkomagome, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 171-0021, Japan

*These authors contributed equally to the work.

Nature, in press

The phosphorylation of the amino acid tyrosine in animal proteins 
acts as an on-off switch in numerous pathways that regulate growth, 
differentiation and oncogenesis. In the cellular slime Dictyostelium 
discoideum, tyrosine-phosphorylation of actin controls cell-shape 
changes and spore activity, but the significance of protein-tyrosine 
phosphorylation in plants is unknown. Here we show that actin in 
contact-sensitive plant Mimosa pudica L. is heavily tyrosine-phosphorylated 
and that changes in the extent of phosphorylation correlate with the 
degree of bending of the plant's petioles. We propose that tyrosine-
phosphorylation of actin controls movements in plants.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Cell-fate choice in Dictyostelium: intrinsic biases modulate sensitivity 
to DIF signalling

Christopher R. L. Thompson and Robert R. Kay

MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 2QH
England

Developmental Biology, in press

Cell fate in Dictyostelium development depends on intrinsic differences 
between cells, dating from their growth period, and on cell interactions 
occurring during development.  We have sought for a mechanism linking 
these two influences on cell fate.  First, we confirmed earlier work 
showing that the vegetative differences are biases, not commitments, 
since cells that are stalky-biased when developed with one partner are 
sporey with another.  Then we tested the idea that these biases operate 
by modulating the sensitivity of cells to the signals controlling cell 
fate during development.  Cells grown without glucose are stalky-biased 
when developed with cells grown with glucose.  We find, using monolayer 
culture conditions, that they are more sensitive to each of the stalk-
inducing signals, DIFs 1-3.  Mixing experiments show that this bias is a 
cell-intrinsic property.  Cells initiating development early in the cell 
cycle are stalky compared to those initiating development later in the 
cycle.  Likewise, they are more sensitive to DIF-1.  Assays of standard 
markers for prestalk and prespore cell differentiation reveal similar 
differences in DIF-1 sensitivity between biased cells; DIF-1 dechlorinase 
(an early prestalk cell marker enzyme) behaves in a consistent manner.  
We propose that cell-fate biases are manifest as differences in 
sensitivity to DIF.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A precise group size in Dictyostelium is generated by a cell-counting
factor modulating cell-cell adhesion

Celine Roisin-Bouffay1, Wonhee Jang2, David R. Caprette2, and Richard H.
Gomer1,2

1Howard Hughes Medical Institute and 2Department of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology MS-140, Rice University 6100 S. Main Street Houston, TX 77005-1892

Molecular Cell, in press.

A remarkable aspect of Dictyostelium development is that cells form evenly
sized groups of ~2 x 10exp4 cells.  A secreted 450 kD protein complex
called counting factor (CF) regulates the number of cells per group.  We
find that CF regulates group size by repressing cell-cell adhesion.  In
both experiments and computer simulations, high levels of CF (and thus low
adhesion) result in aggregation streams breaking up into small groups,
while no CF (and thus high adhesion) results in no stream breakup and large
groups.  These results suggest that in Dictyostelium and possibly other
systems a secreted factor regulating cell-cell adhesion can regulate the
size of a group of cells.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Related Ga subunits play opposing roles during Dictyostelium development

Kanchana Natarajan, Casey A. Ashley and Jeffrey A. Hadwiger

Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics
Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma 74078-3020

Differentiation, In Press

Of the several known Dictyostelium G protein subunits, the Ga4 and Ga5
subunits are the most closely related pair based on phylogenetic analysis
and expression patterns but these subunits perform different roles during
development.  To investigate potential relationships between these subunits
with respect to cell differentiation, chimeric organisms composed of
strains lacking or overexpressing either subunit were created and examined
for developmental morphogenesis and spore production.  Chimeras of ga4 null
and ga5 null strains or Ga4 and Ga5 overexpression strains displayed
compensatory morphogenesis, implying the subunits promote complementary
developmental processes.  However, chimeras composed of ga4 null and Ga5
overexpression strains or ga5 null and Ga4 overexpression strains displayed
distorted tip morphogenesis, suggesting the strains of each chimera share
common developmental deficiencies.  Cells lacking the Ga5 subunit localized
to the prespore region of chimeras similar to the pattern observed for
cells overexpressing the Ga4 subunit and cells overexpressing the Ga5
subunit displayed localization patterns similar to ga4 null mutants.  A
strain overexpressing both subunits displayed a partial suppression of
morphology, gene expression and cell localization phenotypes associated
with the overexpression of the individual Ga subunit genes suggesting each
Ga subunits can inhibit signaling mediated by the other subunit.
Overexpression of the Ga5 subunit inhibited chemotaxis and cGMP
accumulation in response to folic acid, indicating the Ga5 subunit can
inhibit early steps in the Ga4-mediated signal transduction pathway.  The
contrasting phenotypes of the Ga mutants suggest the Ga4 and Ga5 subunits
provide opposing functions in cell differentiation, localization, and
chemotactic responses to folic acid.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 15, number 5]
