Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 15, number 2
July 15, 2000

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty"

==============
  Abstracts
==============

An F-Box/WD40 repeat-containing protein important for Dictyostelium
cell-type proportioning, slug behaviour and culmination

Margaret K. Nelson*, Alexandra Clark+, Tomoaki Abe^, Anson Nomura+,
Negendra Yadava+, Chanin J. Funair*, Keith A. Jermyn^, Sudhasri Mohanty+,
Richard A. Firtel+, and Jeffrey G. Williams^

* Department of Biology, Allegheny College, Meadville, PA 16335, USA

+Department of Biology, Center for Molecular Genetics, University of 
California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla CA 92093-0634, USA

^Department of Anatomy and Physiology, University of Dundee, MSI/WTB 
Complex, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK

Develop. Biol., in press.

ABSTRACT 

FbxA is a novel member of a family of proteins that contain an
F-box and WD40 repeats and that target specific proteins for degradation
via proteasomes. In fruiting bodies formed from cells where the fbxA gene
is disrupted (fbxA- cells), the spore mass fails to fully ascend the stalk.
In addition, fbxA- slugs continue to migrate under environmental conditions
where the parental strain immediately forms fruiting bodies. Consistent
with this latter behaviour, the development of fbxA- cells is
hypersensitive to ammonia, the signalling molecule that regulates the
transition from the slug stage to terminal differentiation. The slug is
comprised of an anterior prestalk region and a posterior prespore region
and the fbxA mRNA is highly enriched in the prestalk cells. The prestalk
zone of the slug is further sub-divided into an anterior pstA region and a
posterior pstO region. In fbxA- slugs the pstO region is reduced in size
and the prespore region is proportionately expanded. Our results indicate
that FbxA is part of a regulatory pathway that controls cell fate decisions
and spatial patterning via regulated protein degradation.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Characterisation of a DNA sequence element that directs Dictyostelium stalk
cell­specific gene expression

Adriano Ceccarelli1*, Natasha Zhukovskaya2*, Takefumi Kawata2, Salvatore
Bozzaro1and Jeffrey Williams2+

1. Dipartimento di Scienze Cliniche e Biologiche, Ospedale San Luigi Gonzaga
Reg. Gonzole 10  10043, Orbassano, Torino, Italy

2. Department of Anatomy and Physiology, University of Dundee, MSI/WTB 
Complex,, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK

*Both these authors contributed equally to this work

DIFFERENTIATION IN PRESS

ABSTRACT 

The ecmB gene of Dictyostelium is expressed at culmination, both
in the prestalk cells that enter the stalk tube and in ancillary stalk cell
structures such as the basal disc. Stalk tube-specific expression is
regulated by sequence elements within the cap site proximal part of the
promoter, the Stalk Tube (ST) promoter region. Dd-STATa, a member of the
STAT transcription factor family, binds to elements present in the ST
promoter-region and represses transcription prior to entry into the stalk
tube. We characterise an activatory DNA sequence element, that lies distal
to the repressor elements and that is both necessary and sufficient for
expression within the stalk tube. We have mapped this activator to a 28
nucleotide region (the 28-mer), within which we have identified a
GA-containing sequence element that is required for efficient gene
transcription. The Dd-STATa protein binds to the 28-mer in an in vitro
binding assay and binding is dependent upon the GA-containing sequence.
However, the ecmB gene is expressed in a Dd-STATa null mutant therefore
Dd-STATa cannot be responsible for activating the 28-mer in vivo. Instead,
we identify a distinct 28-mer binding activity in nuclear extracts from the
Dd-STATa null mutant, the activity of this GA binding activity being
largely masked in wild type extracts by the high affinity binding of the
Dd-STATa protein. We suggest that, in addition to the long range repression
exerted by binding to the two known repressor sites, Dd-STATa inhibits
transcription by direct competition with this putative activator for
binding to the GA sequence.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A myosin I is involved in membrane recycling from early endosomes

Eva M. Neuhaus and Thierry Soldati#

Department of Molecular Cell Research, Max-Planck-Institute for Medical
Research, Jahnstrasse 29, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany

#Corresponding author: Tel: +49-6221-486407, Fax: +49-6221-486325, E-mail:
soldati@mpimf-heidelberg.mpg.de

Journal of Cell Biology, in press

Abstract

	Geometry-based mechanisms have been proposed to account for the sorting of
membranes and fluid phase in the endocytic pathway, yet little is known
about the involvement of the actin-myosin cytoskeleton. Here, we demonstrate
that Dictyostelium discoideum myosin IB functions in the recycling of plasma
membrane components from endosomes back to the cell surface. Cells lacking
MyoB (myoA-/B-, and myoB- cells) and wild-type cells treated with the myosin
inhibitor BDM accumulated a plasma membrane marker and biotinylated surface
proteins on intracellular endocytic vacuoles. An assay based on reversible
biotinylation of plasma membrane proteins demonstrated that recycling of
membrane components is severely impaired in myoA/B null cells. In addition,
MyoB was specifically found on magnetically purified early pinosomes. Using
a rapid-freezing cryo-EM method, we observed an increased number of small
vesicles tethered to relatively early endocytic vacuoles in myoA-/B- cells,
but not to later endosomes and lysosomes. This accumulation of vesicles
suggests that the defects in membrane recycling result from a disordered
morphology of the sorting compartment.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Rapid patterning in 2D-cultures of Dictyostelium cells and its relation to
zonal differentiation

Takashi Hirano1, Satoshi Sawai2, Yasuji Sawada3  and Yasuo Maeda1*

1 Biological Institute, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University, Aoba,
Sendai 980-8578, 2Graduate School of Information Sciences, and 3Research
Institute of Electrical Communication, Tohoku University, Katahira, Sendai
980-8577, Japan.

*Author to whom all correspondence should be addressed.
E-mail: ymaeda@mail.cc.tohoku.ac.jp

Develop. Growth Differ., in press

Summary

Rapid patterning has been realized in confined two-dimensional (2-D)
cultures of Dictyostelium discoideum  Ax-2 cells, as the outer dark zone and
inner light zone, the width of outer zone being usually about 100 µm,
irrespective of the size of cell masses under the atomospheric condition.
The width of outer zone, however, changed depending on external oxygen (O2) 
concentrations and reached to 250 µm at 100 % O2 . A clear regional
difference in TMRM  ( tetramethyl rhodamine methyl ester ) staining was
noticed between the outer zone and the inner zone: the inner zone being more
strongly stained with TMRM rather than the outer zone facing the air. Using
the inhibitors ( DNP or NaN3 ) of oxidative phosphorylation and the specific
inhibitor ( BHAM ) of CN-resistant respiration,it has benn demonstrated that
the outer zone is basically formed by the O2 -threshold for oxidative
phosphorylation, while that the inner cells mainly perform CN-resistant
respiration. When cells around the early mound stage ( just before prestalk
and prespore differentiation ) were cultured as 2D-cell masses,
ecmA-expressing cells ( pstA cells ), ecmB-expressing cells ( pstB cells ),
and D19-expressing cells ( prespore; psp cells ), there arized in a
position-dependent manner in the outer zone. In the inner zone, cell
motility seemed to be markedly impaired, and also neither prestalk nor
prespore differentiation occurred. In addition, once-differentiated prespore
cells were found to dedifferentiate rapidly in the inner zone. The reason
for failure of cells to dedifferentiate as well as to differentiate in the
inner zone is discussed with reference to O2-radicals.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A cell type-specific effect of calcium on pattern formation and
differentiation in Dictyostelium discoideum.

R. Baskar, Preeti Chhabra, Priya Mascarenhas and Vidyanand Nanjundiah
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, India.

Int. J. Develop. Biol., in press.

Spatial gradients of sequestered and free calcium exist in the slug of
Dictyostelium discoideum (Maeda and Maeda, 1973; Tirlapur et al., 1991;
Azhar et al., 1995; Cubitt et al., 1995). When we vary intracellular Ca2+
with the help of calcium buffers and the ionophore Br-A23187, there are
striking effects on slug morphology, patterning and cell differentiation.
In the presence of a calcium ionophore, high external Ca2+ levels lead to
an increase of intracellular sequestered and free calcium, the formation of
long slugs, a decrease in the fraction of genetically defined prespore
cells and stalky fruiting bodies. Conversely, a lowering of external Ca2+
levels results in a decrease of intracellular sequestered and free calcium,
the formation of short slugs, an increase in the prespore fraction and
spory fruiting bodies. We infer that Ca2+ plays a significant morphogenetic
role in D. discoideum development by selectively promoting the prestalk
pathway relative to the prespore pathway.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 15, number 2]
