Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 15, number 11
December 9, 2000

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page
"http://dicty.cmb.northwestern.edu/dicty"

Editors note:  The following is a draft proposal developed by a 
committee constituted at the Dundee Dicty 2000 meeting to develop a
proposal for genetic nomenclature.  The committee is anxious for
feedback.  To facilitate the widest possible involvement of the community
in this important discussion, please send your comments to the email 
server address: dicty@listserv.it.northwestern.edu.  


========================
   Postdocs Available
========================

Postdoctoral position 

A Wellcome Trust funded postdoctoral position is available immediately 
in the laboratory of Kees Weijer in the Wellcome Trust Biocentre, 
University of Dundee, UK. The position is available initially for two 
years to work on the investigation of cAMP signal transduction pathways 
during chemotactic cell movement in the multicellular stages of 
Dictyostelium discoideum. The project involves the visualization and 
analysis of early rapid events in the cAMP signal transduction pathway 
leading to cAMP generation and chemotactic cell movement. We are 
investigating the activation of a number of phosphatidyl- inositol-lipid 
kinases and phosphatases in vivo, by measuring the translocation of GFP 
tagged PH (Plekstrin Homology) domains with different lipid specificities 
from the cytosol to the plasma membrane upon chemotactic stimulation of 
cells at different stages of development. Activation of these pathways 
are essential steps in the activation of adenylylcylase and localized 
actin polymerization. This allows us to detect in vivo cell-cell signaling 
with high spatial and temporal resolution in wildtype and mutant strains. 
Furthermore the project involves the development and use of FRET 
(Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer) between fusion proteins tagged 
with different spectral forms of GFP to analyse in-vivo complex formation 
between components of the cAMP signal transduction pathway. Experience 
in molecular biology/biochemistry and fluorescence imaging techniques 
are advantageous.

Applicants should submit a CV, a summary of their current research 
interests and the names and addresses of three referees to 
c.j.weijer@dundee.ac.uk or to C.J. Weijer, School of Life Sciences, 
University of Dundee, Wellcome Trust Biocentre, Dow Street, Dundee, 
DD1 5EH, UK

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

POSTDOCTORAL POSITION IN BERLIN

ROLE OF CALCINEURIN IN DICTYOSTELIUM

A 5 year postdoctoral position is open from January, 2001, in the 
Microbiology II unit at the Institut fuer Biologie, Freie 
Universitaet Berlin. The successful candidate will work on the 
function and regulation of expression of the 
calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein phosphatase calcineurin in 
Dictyostelium, and participate in the teaching activities of our 
group. Applicants should have a strong background in molecular 
biology and biochemistry. For more information, please contact me.

Rupert Mutzel
Fachbereich Biologie, Chemie, Pharmazie
Institut fuer Biologie - Mikrobiologie
Freie Universitaet Berlin
Koenigin-Luise-Strasse 12 - 16
14195 Berlin
Germany
Tel.: +30-838-53116
Fax: +30-838-53118


==============
  Abstracts
==============

CYTOKINESIS FAILURE IN CLATHRIN-MINUS CELLS IS CAUSED BY CLEAVAGE FURROW
INSTABILITY.

Noel J. Gerald1, Cynthia K. Damer2, Theresa J. O'Halloran3 and Arturo De
Lozanne3

1Dept. of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710,
2Dept. of Biology, Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, NY 12604
and
3Section of Molecular Cell & Developmental Biology and Institute for
Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712.

Cell Motility and the Cytoskeleton, in press

ABSTRACT

    The role of membrane traffic during cell division has only recently
begun to be investigated.  A growing number of trafficking proteins  seem to
be involved in the successful completion of cytokinesis.  Clathrin was the
first trafficking protein to be shown to be essential for cytokinesis in
Dictyostelium.  Here we investigate the nature of the cytokinesis defect of
Dictyostelium clathrin null cells.  We found that adherent clathrin null
cells do form cleavage furrows but cannot maintain a consistent rate of
furrow ingression.  Clathrin null cells are completely defective in
cytokinesis when placed in suspension.  In these conditions the cells
develop an abnormal division morphology that consists of two lateral
"furrows" on either side of a bulging equatorial region.  Cells expressing
GFP-myosin II were examined at various stages of cytokinesis.  Clathrin null
cells show multiple defects in myosin organization and localization that
parallel the striking failure in furrow morphology.  We postulate that this
morphology is the result of contraction at the rear of the presumptive
daughter cells in concert with incomplete furrow ingression.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Analysis of Skp1 glycosylation and nuclear enrichment in Dictyostelium.

Sassi, S., M. Sweetinburgh, J. Erogul, P. Zhang, P. Teng-umnuay & C.M. West

Glycobiology, in press. 

Abstract

   Skp1 is a subunit of SCF-E3 ubiquitin ligases and other protein complexes 
in the nucleus and cytoplasm of yeast and mammalian cells. In Dictyostelium, 
Skp1 is partially modified by an unusual pentasaccharide O-linked to 
hydroxyproline143. This modification was found to be susceptible to known 
prolyl hydroxylase inhibitors based on Mr-shift analysis using SDS-PAGE/Western 
blotting. In addition, Dictyostelium Skp1 consists of 2 genetic isoforms, 
Skp1A and Skp1B, which differ by a single amino acid and appear to be expressed 
throughout the life cycle based on RT-PCR. The significance of these structural 
variations was examined by expressing myc-tagged Skp1s and mutants that lacked 
the glycosylation site. Gel-based Mr-shift studies showed that Skp1A and Skp1B 
are both nearly completely glycosylated during growth and early development, 
and mass spectrometry of glycopeptides showed that they were glycosylated 
similarly. Skp1 expressed later in prespore cells was not glycosylated, unlike 
bulk Skp1 persisting from earlier in development, but became glycosylated after 
return to growth medium. Skp1A and Skp1B were each concentrated in the nucleus 
and regions of the cytoplasm, based on immunofluorescence localization. However, 
when Skp1 glycosylation was blocked by mutation, prolyl hydroxylase inhibitors, 
or expression in prespore cells, Nuclear concentration of Skp1 was not detected. 
Furthermore, nuclear concentration occurred in a mutant that attached only the 
core disaccharide to Skp1. Overall, there was no evidence for differential Skp1 
isoform expression, glycosylation variants in the bulk Skp1 pool, or for 
regulation of nuclear localization. However, these studies uncovered evidence 
that the glycosylation pathway is developmentally regulated and can function 
posttranslationally, and that core glycosylation is required for Skp1's nuclear 
concentration.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Calcium stores in differentiated Dictyostelium discoideum: prespore cells
sequester calcium more efficiently than prestalk cells

Christina Schlatterer(1), Paul Walther (2), Martin Müller (3), Kurt Mendgen
(1), Karl Zierold (4), Gerd Knoll

1 Faculty of Biology, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany
2 Section Electron Microscopy, University of Ulm, Albert Einstein Allee 11,
Ulm, Germany
3 Laboratory for EM I, ETH Zürich, Schmelzbergstr. 7, Zürich, Switzerland
4 Max Planck Institute for Molecular Physiology, Otto Hahn Str. 11,
Dortmund, Germany

Cell Calcium, in press.

Summary 

Dictyostelium discoideum pseudoplasmodia exhibit a gradient of the
cytosolic free Ca 2+-concentration
([Ca2+]i) along their anterior-posterior axis involved in cell-type
specific differentiation. [Ca2+]i is high in prestalk and low in prespore
cells. We determined the content and localization of calcium and other
elements in cryosectioned cells of pseudoplasmodia and fruiting bodies by
X-ray microanalysis. Granular stores rich in Ca, Mg and P were identified.
Average Ca was higher in prespore than prestalk granules (225 vs 111
mmol/kg dry weight). Total Ca stored in granules was also higher in
prespore than prestalk cells. The amount of P and S in granules differed
between the two cell types indicating different store composition. In
spores mean granular Ca was 120 mmol/kg dry weight. Stalk cells had smaller
granules with 360 mmol Ca/kg dry weight. Complementary to microanalysis,
vesicular Ca2+-fluxes were studied in fractionated cell homogenates. The
rate of Ca2+-uptake was higher in pellet fractions of prespore than
prestalk amoebae (4.7 vs 3.4 nmol/min x mg). Ca2+-release was greater in
supernatant fractions from prestalk than prespore cells (16.5 vs 7.7
nmol/10 8 cells). In summary, prestalk and prespore cells possess
qualitatively different, high-capacity stores containing distinct amounts
of Ca and probably being involved in regulation of the anterior-posterior
[Ca2+]i-gradient.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Gene function analysis by amber stop codon suppression:  CMBF is a
nuclear protein that supports growth and development of Dictyostelium
amoebae


Thomas Winckler (1), Christine Trautwein (2), Christina Tschepke (1),
Christin Neuhduser (1), Ilse Z|ndorf (1), Peter Beck (1), G|nter Vogel
(2) and Theodor Dingermann (1)

(1) Institut f|r Pharmazeutische Biologie, Universitdt Frankfurt/M.
(Biozentrum), D-60439 Frankfurt am Main, Germany and (2) Fachbereich 9 -
Chemie, Bergische Universitdt, D-42119 Wuppertal, Germany


J. Molecular Biology, in press

Abstract

The C-module-binding factor, CMBF, is a nuclear DNA-binding protein
which was originally identified through its specific binding to a
promoter element within the retrotransposable element TRE5-A of
Dictyostelium discoideum AX2 cells. In order to analyse putative
physiological functions of CMBF for the TRE5-A-hosting D. discoideum
cells, we used a novel strategy to create mutant cell lines which stably
underexpressed functional CMBF. An amber (UAG) translation stop codon
was introduced into the chromosomal copy of the CMBF-encoding gene
(cbfA), and an amber suppressor tRNA gene was expressed in the same
mutant cells. Due to the low efficiency of translation stop codon
suppression in this system all recovered cell lines expressed <20% of
wildtype CMBF levels. The mutant cell lines displayed strong growth
phenotypes when plated on their natural food source, bacteria. We show
evidence that growth reduction was due to impaired phagocytosis of
bacteria in the mutants. All obtained mutants showed a strong
developmental defect which was defined by the formation of very small
fruiting bodies. The strength of the developmental phenotype appeared to
depend upon the residual CMBF levels maintained in the mutants. We
propose that CMBF is a general transcription regulator which supports
the normal expression of several genes required for the maintenance of
high proliferation rates of D. discoideum amoebae as well as proper
aggregation and development. Our results demonstrate that amber stop
codon suppression may be a useful strategy to stably underexpress
proteins whose coding genes cannot be successfully disrupted by
homologous recombination.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

SINGLE-MOLECULE TRACKING OF MYOSINS WITH GENETICALLY ENGINEERED AMPLIFIER
DOMAINS

Christine Ruff, Marcus Furch, Bernhard Brenner, Dietmar J. Manstein, and
Edgar Meyhöfer

Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Medical School Hanover, Carl-Neuberg-Str.
1, 30625 Hannover, Germany and
Department of Biophysics, Max-Planck-Institute for Medical Research,
Jahnstr. 29, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany

Nature Strucural Biology (in press)

Abstract

We combined protein engineering and single-molecule measurements to directly
record the step size of a series of myosin constructs with shortened and
elongated necks generated by deleting or replacing the natural neck with
artificial domains. Our results show a clear linear dependence of the step
size on the length of the neck domain and establish that mechanical
amplification in the myosin motor is based on a rotation of the neck domain
relative to the actin-bound head. For all our constructs, including those
with artificial necks, the magnitude of the neck rotation concurrent with
the displacement step is about 30°. The engineered step size-change of
myosins marks a significant advance in our ability to selectively modify the
functional properties of molecular motors.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------


STRUCTURE OF A GENETICALLY ENGINEERED MOLECULAR MOTOR

Werner Kliche, Setsuko Fujita-Becker, Martin Kollmar, Dietmar J. Manstein,
and F. Jon Kull

Department of Biophysics, Max Planck Institute for Medical Research,
Jahnstrasse 29, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany


EMBO Journal (in press)

Abstract

Molecular motors move unidirectionally along polymer tracks, producing
movement and force in an ATP-dependent fashion. They achieve this by
amplifying small conformational changes in the nucleotide-binding region
into force-generating movements of larger protein domains. Here we present
the 0.28 nm resolution crystal structure of an artificial actin-based motor.
By combining the catalytic domain of myosin II with a 13.0 nm conformational
amplifier consisting of repeats 1 and 2 of alpha-actinin, we demonstrate
that it is possible to genetically engineer single-polypeptide molecular
motors with precisely defined lever arm lengths and specific motile
properties. Furthermore, our structure shows the consequences of mutating a
conserved salt bridge in the nucleotide-binding region and visualizes the
structure of alpha-actinin repeats 1 and 2 to be composed of two rigid,
triple-helical bundles linked by an uninterrupted alpha-helix.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Maltose-binding protein as a fusion-tag for the localization and
purification of cloned proteins in Dictyostelium

Ralph Gräf

Adolf-Butenandt-Institut / Zellbiologie, Schillerstr. 42, D-80336 München,
Germany

Anal. Biochem. in press

One of the best and most frequently used tags for protein purification from
E. coli extracts is maltose binding protein (MBP). MBP fusion proteins
exhibit high affinity to amylose allowing purification by amylose-agarose
chromatography and elution at low concentrations of maltose. The isolated
fusion protein is highly pure and the elution conditions are generally
harmless to native proteins and do not involve addition of proteinacious
eluting agents. However, the use of MBP as a protein tag was so far mainly
restricted to E. coli expression systems and it has never been used in
Dictyostelium. Using the Dictyostelium Ser/Thr kinase DdNek2 as an example,
this work demonstrates that MBP is an excellent fusion tag not only in the
E. coli system but also in Dictyostelium since it allows quick and simple
purification of a catalytically active protein from crude cell extracts.
Moreover, it is proven to be suitable for protein localization studies with
anti-MBP antibodies. Thus, MBP as a protein tag may be useful for other
eukaryotic experimetal systems as well.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Small GTPases in Dictyostelium:  lessons from a social amoeba
Andrew Wilkins and Robert H. Insall

Trends in Genetics, January 00

Although the process of sequencing the Dictyostelium genome is not
complete, it is already producing surprises, including an unexpectedly large
number of Ras and Rho small GTPases. Members of these families control a
wide variety of cellular processes in eukaryotes, including proliferation,
differentiation, cell motility and cell polarity. Comparison of small GTPases
from Dictyostelium with those from higher eukaryotes provides an intriguing
view of their cellular and evolutionary roles. In particular, 
although mammalian Ras proteins interact with several signalling pathways, 
the Dictyostelium pathways appear more linear, with each Ras apparently 
performing a specific cellular function.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Review

Dictyostelium discoideum: a model system for differentiation and patterning

RICARDO ESCALANTE* and JUAN J. VICENTE

Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas. C.S.I.C/U.A.M., Madrid, Spain.

*Address correspondence to: Ricardo Escalante. Instituto de Investigaciones
Biomédicas. C.S.I.C/U.A.M., C/Arturo Duperier, 4, 28029 Madrid, Spain. FAX:
+34-91-5854587. e-mail: rescalante@iib.uam.es

Int.J.Dev.Biol. (in press)

CONTENTS

Introduction
The morphological development and genome of Dictyostelium discoideum
Tools used to study Dictyostelium Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics
	Transformation
	Restriction enzyme-mediated integration (REMI)
	Disruption of genes by homologous recombination
	Suppressor screening
	In situ hybridization and lacZ staining for gene expression studies
	Mixing experiments for detection of subtle phenotypes and
           extracellular signaling
Regulatory pathways in Dictyostelium development
	Chemotaxis and aggregation
	Regulation of post-aggregative cell-type differentiation
	Regulation of cell-type proportion
	Terminal differentiation

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Biphasic expression of rnrB in Dictyostelium discoideum suggests a direct
relationship between cell cycle control and cell differentiation

Harry MacWilliams1*, Pascale Gaudet2, Heike Deichsel1, Claire Bonfils3,4,
and Adrian Tsang2,3

1Zoologisches Insitut, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat, Luisenstrasse 14,
80333 München 2, Germany
2Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Centre for Functional and
Structural Genomics and 
3Department of Biology, Concordia University, 1455
de Maisonneuve Blvd West, Montréal, Québec H3G 1M8, Canada
4present address: MethylGene Inc., 7220 Frederick-Banting, Ville
St-Laurent, Québec H4S 2A1, Canada

Accepted, DIFFERENTIATION

Abstract

Cell differentiation in Dictyostelium is strongly affected by the cell
cycle.  Cell cycle control is well-understood in other systems, but this
has had almost no impact on the study of Dictyostelium cell
differentiation, in part because the cell cycle in Dictyostelium is
unusual, lacking a G1 phase.   Here we describe the cell-cycle regulated
expression of  rnrB, which codes for the small subunit of ribonucleotide
reductase, and is a marker of late G1 in many systems.  There appear to be
two expression peaks, one in mid-G2 and the other near the G2/M
transition.   Using Xgal/anti-BrdU double staining, we show that cells in
asynchronously growing cultures express in both phases, with a gap between
them during which the gene is transcriptionally silent.  Cold-synchronized
cells show exclusively G2/M expression, while mid-G2 expression is seen in
high-density synchronized cells and can also be inferred in cells
undergoing synchronization by either method.  

rnrB expression occurs in other systems shortly after cells pass a point
(the "restriction point" or "Start") at which they commit to complete
their current cell cycle.  We demonstrate a similar commitment point in
Dictyostelium and show that this occurs shortly before the mid-G2 rnrB
expression peak.  The Dictyostelium cell cycle thus appears to include a
well-defined although inconspicuous event, between early and mid-G2,  with
some features which are normally associated with the G1/S
transition.  Others have described a switch from stalk to spore
differentiation preference at about this time.  Since Dictyostelium cells
switch back from spore to stalk preference approximately at the G2/M rnrB
expression maximum, cell differentiation as well as rnrB expression may be
regulated directly by fundamental cell cycle control processes.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

During multicellular migration, myosin II serves a structural role
independent of its motor function

Xiaoxin Susan Xu#,1, Eunkyung Lee#, Tung-ling Chen*, Edward Kuczmarski†, 
Rex L. Chisholm*, and David A. Knecht#

#Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut, 
Storrs, CT 06269, †Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Chicago Medical 
School, Chicago IL 60064 and *Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, 
Northwestern University Medical School. Chicago, Illinois 60611

Develop. Biol., in press.

ABSTRACT
We have shown previously that cells lacking myosin II are impaired in 
multicellular motility.  We now extend these results by determining whether 
myosin contractile activity function is necessary for normal multicellular 
motility and shape control.  Myosin from mutants lacking the essential (mlcE-) 
myosin light chain retains the ability to form bipolar filaments that bind 
actin, but shows no measurable in vitro or in vivo contractile function.  This 
contractile function is necessary for cell shape control since mlcE- cells, 
like myosin heavy chain null mutants (mhcA-), were defective in their ability 
to control their three-dimensional shape.  When mixed with wild-type cells in 
chimeric aggregation streams, the mlcE-  cells were able to move normally, 
unlike mhcA- cells which accumulated at the edges of the stream and became 
distorted by their interactions with wild-type cells.  When mhcA- cells were 
mixed with mlcE- streams, the mhcA- cells were excluded.  The normal behavior 
of the mlcE- cells in this assay suggests thatthe actin binding activity of 
myosin II, in the absence of motor function, is sufficient to allow movement 
in this constrained, multicellular environment.  We hypothesize that myosin 
II is a major contributor to cortical integrity, even in the absence of 
contractile function.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Golvesin-GFP Fusions as Distinct Markers for Golgi and Post-Golgi Vesicles
in Dictyostelium Cells

Natalie Schneider+, Jean-Marc Schwartz+, Michael Becker+, Jana Koehler+,
Heinz Schwarz§  and Guenther Gerisch+

+  Max-Planck-Institut fuer Biochemie, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany
§  Max-Planck-Institut fuer Entwicklungsbiologie, D-72076 Tuebingen, Germany

Biology of the Cell, in press.

Abstract   

Golvesin is a new protein associated with membranes of the Golgi apparatus
and post-Golgi vesicles in Dictyostelium cells. An internal hydrophobic
sequence of 24 amino-acid residues is responsible for anchoring golvesin to
the membranes of these organelles. In an attempt to visualize organelle
dynamics in vivo, we have used specific antibody and other labels to
localize golvesin-GFP constructs to different cellular compartments. With a
GFP tag at its N-terminus, golvesin shows the same localization as the
untagged protein. It is transferred to two post-Golgi compartments, the
endosomal and contractile vacuole systems. Endosomes are decorated with
GFP-golvesin within less than 10 minutes of their internalization, and keep
the label during the acidic phase of the pathway. 
     Blockage of the C-terminus with GFP causes entrapment of the
protein in the Golgi apparatus, indicating that a free C-terminus is
required for transfer of golvesin to any of the post-Golgi compartments.
The C-terminally tagged golvesin proved to be a reliable Golgi marker in
Dictyostelium cells, revealing  protrusion of Golgi tubules at peak
velocities of 3 to 4 mm per second. The fusion protein is retained in Golgi
vesicles during mitosis, visualizing Golgi disassembly and reorganization
in line with cytokinesis.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

[End Dicty News, volume 15, number 11]
