Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 11, number 4
August 22, 1998

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

===========
 Abstracts
===========
 
Overexpression of a Novel Rho-family GTPase, RacC, Induces Unusual
Actin-based Structures and Positively Affects phagocytosis in Dictyostelium
discoideum 
David J. Seastone (1) , Eunkyung Lee (2), John Bush (3), David Knecht (2), 
and James Cardelli(1,4)

(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and (4) The Feist-Weiller Cancer 
Center,  Louisiana State University Medical Center, Shreveport, LA 71130.   
(2) Department of Molecular and Cell Biology  University of Connecticut.  
Storrs, CT 06269.   (3)Department of Biology,  University of Arkansas, 
Little Rock AR 72204.

Mol. Biol. Cell, in press

Abstract

   Rho family proteins have been implicated in regulating a variety of 
cellular processes including actin cytoskeleton organization, endocytosis, 
cell cycle, and gene expression.  In this study, we analyzed the function of 
a novel D. discoideum Rho family protein (RacC).  A cell-line was generated 
that conditionally overexpressed wild-type RacC 3-4 fold relative to endogenous 
RacC.  Light microscopy and SEM indicated that the morphology of the RacC 
overexpressing cells (RacC WT(+) cells) was significantly altered compared 
to control cells.  In contrast to the cortical F-actin distribution normally 
observed, RacC WT(+) cells displayed unusual dorsal and peripheral F-actin rich 
surface blebs (petalopodia; for flower-like). Furthermore, phagocytosis in the 
RacC WT(+) cells was induced three-fold relative to control Ax2 cells, while 
fluid-phase pinocytosis was reduced three-fold, primarily as the result of an 
inhibition of macropinocytosis.  Efflux of fluid phase markers was also reduced 
in the RacC WT(+) cells, suggesting that RacC may regulate post-internalization 
steps along the endo-lysosomal pathway.  Treatment of cells with wortmannin and 
LY294002 (PI 3-kinase inhibitors) prevented the RacC-induced morphological 
changes but did not affect phagocytosis, suggesting that petalopodia are probably 
not required for RacC-induced phagocytosis. In contrast, inactivating diacylglycerol-
binding motif-containing proteins by treating cells with the drug calphostin C 
completely inhibited phagocytosis in control and RacC WT(+) cells.  These results 
suggest that RacC plays a role in actin cytoskeleton organization and phagocytosis 
in Dictyostelium.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

G PROTEIN SIGNALING EVENTS ARE ACTIVATED AT THE LEADING EDGE OF CHEMOTACTIC
CELLS

Carole A. Parent, Brenda J. Blacklock, Wendy M. Froehlich, Douglas B.
Murphy, and Peter N. Devreotes

Department of Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore MD  21205

Cell, In Press

Abstract

   Directional sensing by eucaryotic cells does not require polarization 
of chemoattractant receptors. The translocation of the PH-domain containing 
protein CRAC in D. discoideum to binding sites on the inner face of the 
plasma membrane reflects activation of the G protein-linked signaling system. 
Increments in chemoattractant elicit a uniform response around the cell 
periphery. Yet when cells are exposed to a gradient the activation occurs 
selectively at the stimulated edge, even in immobilized cells. We propose 
that such localized activation, transmitted by the recruitment of cytosolic 
proteins, may be a general mechanism for gradient sensing by G protein-linked 
chemotactic systems including those involving chemotactic cytokines in leukocytes. 

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transcription of the Dictyostelium glycogen phosphorylase-2 gene is induced
by three large promoter domains

Reyna Favis¥, Ian McCaffery*, Gretchen Ehrenkaufer# and Charles L. RutherfordÆ
Dept. of Biology, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
Blacksburg, VA 24061-0406 USA

Developmental Genetics, in press

ABSTRACT

   The promoter of the Dictyostelium glycogen phosporylase-2 (gp2) gene 
possesses a profound AT-bias, typical of promoters in this organism.  To understand 
how Dictyostelium  achieves specificity during transcriptional regulation under 
the constraint of this highly biased nucleotide composition, we have documented 
the changes in chromatin structure associated with developmental induction of gp2 
gene expression.  DNase I hypersensitive analyses indicated the presence of several 
developmentally regulated nuclease-sensitive sites located upstream of the start 
codon: two strong sites at approximately   -250 bp and -350 bp and three substantially 
weaker sites at -290 bp, -445 bp and -505 bp.  In vitro footprint analyses using 
nuclear extracts derived from several stages of development (corresponding to 
varying levels of gp2 expression) revealed three large regions of occupation that 
were developmentally regulated and corresponded to these nuclease-sensitive sites: 
-227 to -294 bp (domain 1), -327 to -383 bp (domain 2) and -416 to   -534 bp (domain 
3).  The presence and the extent of the three regulatory domains was confirmed by in 
vivo footprint analyses spanning the same developmental time points.  Southwestern 
analyses using probes encompassing these footprints demonstrated that probes 
corresponding to domains 1 and 3 both interacted with 83 and 77 kDa peptides.  
The domain 3 probe also interacted with a 92 kDa peptide, while only a 62 kDa 
peptide is recognized by the domain 2 probe.  In all cases, peptides capable of 
binding these probes were found in nuclear extracts derived from differentiated 
cells and not in undifferentiated cell nuclear extract.  Using nuclear extract 
from differentiated cells and probes corresponding to the three domains, gel mobility 
shift analyses detected ladders of retarded bands for both domains 1 and 3 and three 
major retarded bands for domain 2.  These results suggest that specificity in 
transcriptional activation in the AT-rich promoters of Dictyostelium may be achieved 
by requiring multiple protein-DNA and/or protein-protein interactions to occur before 
induction can proceed.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------


THE IQGAP-RELATED PROTEIN DGAP1 INTERACTS WITH RAC AND IS INVOLVED IN THE 
MODULATION OF THE F-ACTIN CYTOSKELETON AND CONTROL OF CELL MOTILITY

Jan Faix 1, Chris Clougherty1, Angelika Konzok1, Ursula Mintert1, John 
Murphy1, Richard Albrecht1, Bettina Mühlbauer1, and Jürgen Kuhlmann2

Max-Planck-Institut fuer Biochemie, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany1, 
Max-Planck-Institut für molekulare Physiologie, D-44026 Dortmund, Germany2

J.Cell Sci., in press

Abstract

   DGAP1 of D. discoideum is a cell cortex associated 95 kDa protein that 
shows homology to both RasGTPase-activating proteins (RasGAPs) and RasGAP-
related proteins. When tested for RasGAP activity, recombinant DGAP1 protein 
did not promote the GTPase activity of human H-Ras or of Dictyostelium RasG 
in vitro. Instead, DGAP1 bound to Dictyostelium Rac1A and human Rac1, but 
not to human Cdc42. DGAP1 preferentially interacted with the activated, GTP-
bound forms of Rac1 and Rac1A, but did not affect the GTPase activities. Since 
Rho-type GTPases are implicated in the formation of specific F-actin structures 
and in the control of cell morphology, the microfilament system of mutants that 
either lack or overexpress DGAP1 has been analysed. DGAP1-null mutants showed 
elevated levels of F-actin that was organized in large leading edges, membrane 
ruffles or numerous large filopods. Expression of actin fused to green fluorescent 
protein (GFP) was used to monitor the actin dynamics in these cells, and revealed 
that the F-actin cytoskeleton of DGAP1-null cells was rapidly re-arranged to 
form ruffles and filopods. Conversely, in DGAP1-overexpressing cells, the formation 
of cellular projections containing F-actin was largely suppressed. Measurement of 
cell migration demonstrated that DGAP1 expression is inversely correlated with the 
speed of cell motility.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 11, number 4]

