Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 11, number 2
August 1, 1998

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

==============
 Announcement
==============

Jeff Williams has moved.  His new address is:

	The Department of Anatomy and Physiology
	University of Dundee
	MSI/WTB Complex
	Dow Street
	DUNDEE
	DD1 5EH
	tel 01382 345828
	e-mail: jgwilliams@bad.dundee.ac.uk

===========
 Abstracts
===========
 
THE HISTIDINE KINASE dhkC REGULATES THE CHOICE BETWEEN MIGRATING SLUGS AND
TERMINAL DIFFERENTIATION IN DICTYOSTELIUM DISCOIDEUM

Charles K. Singleton1, Michael J. Zinda, Brook Mykytka, and Ping Yang

Department of Molecular Biology, Box 1820 Station B, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville TN 37235

Develop. Biol., in press.

Abstract

   An early decision that a newly formed aggregate of Dictyostelium cells must 
make is whether to form a migrating slug or to proceed through culmination, 
the process of forming the mature fruiting body.  The choice between these 
alternative morphological pathways is influenced by external and internal 
cues.  dhkC was identified as a potential hybrid sensor kinase possessing 
domains homologous to the histidine kinase and receiver motifs of two-
component signaling systems.  Null strains of dhkC  show a rapidly developing 
phenotype for aggregation through finger formation, and culmination commences 
immediately thereafter and proceeds at a normal rate to generate typical 
fruiting bodies.  Ammonia, an endogenous regulator of the slug versus culmination 
choice, results in a prolonged slug stage for dhkC + strains while the dhkC - 
strain bypasses the slug stage in the presence or absence of ammonia.  Conversely, 
expression in wild type cells of a modified DHKC protein composed of only 
the histidine kinase domain results in normal timing through early aggregation, 
but subsequent development is significantly delayed.  The resulting fingers, 
once formed, readily convert to slugs that do not undergo culmination but 
instead migrate until their energy sources are depleted.  The slugger phenotype 
is dependent on the presence of a functional response regulator REGA, and it 
is rescued by exogenously supplied cAMP.  Together, the results indicate that 
DHKC contributes to the integration of environmental and cellular signals so 
that the appropriate choice is made between slug formation and culmination.  
We suggest that DHKC may function as a sensor for ammonia, and that it is 
the initial component of a phosphorelay signaling system that may modulate 
the activity of cAMP-dependent protein kinase to either inhibit or promote 
culmination. Additionally, DhkC -  spores were found to be defective in 
germination, indicating a role for the DHKC signaling pathway activating 
spore germination.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Cell-cell signaling during Dictyostelium development

Fredrik Söderbom and William F. Loomis

Center for Molecular Genetics, Department of Biology
University of California San Diego, La Jolla  CA 92423

Trends in Microbiology (in press)

Summary

   Specific proteins and peptides, as well as cAMP, are used as intercellular 
signals in Dictyostelium. Our understanding of the signal transduction pathways 
activated by these signals has been expanded by inclusion of newly 
characterized proteins. cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) and its 
associated phosphodiesterase, RegA, play multiple roles in these pathways.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

A Serum Response Factor Homolog is Required for Spore Differentiation in
Dictyostelium

Ricardo Escalante* and Leandro Sastre

Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas del Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas , C/Arturo Duperier,4. 28029 Madrid. Spain.  

*Author for correspondence: e-mail: rescalante@iib.uam.es 

Development, in press.

Summary

   A homolog of the Serum Response Factor (SRF) has been isolated from 
Dictyostelium discoideum and its function studied by analyzing the consequences 
of its gene disruption. The MADS-box region of Dictyostelium SRF (DdSRF) is 
highly conserved with those of the human, Drosophila and yeast homologs. srfA 
is a developmentally regulated gene expressed in prespore and spore cells. This 
gene plays an essential role in sporulation as its disruption leads to abnormal 
spore morphology and loss of viability.  The mutant spores were round and cellulose 
deposition seemed to be partially affected. Initial prestalk and prespore cell 
differentiation did not seem to be compromised in the mutant since the expression 
of several cell-type specific markers were found to be unaffected. However, the 
mRNA level of the spore marker spiA  was greatly reduced. Activation of the cAMP 
dependent protein kinase (PKA) by 8-Br-cAMP was not able to fully bypass the 
morphological defects of srfA- mutant spores, although this treatment induced 
spiA mRNA expression. Our results suggest that DdSRF is required for full 
maturation of spores and participates in the regulation of the expression of 
the spore-coat marker spiA and probably other maturation genes necessary for 
proper spore cell differentiation.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

High levels of actin tyrosine phosphorylation: correlation with the dormant 
state of Dictyostelium spores

Yoshiro Kishi1,3, Chris Clements2, Dana C. Mahadeo2, David A. Cotter2 
and Masazumi Sameshima3

1Department of Physics, Rikkyo (St. Paul's) University, 3-34-1 Nishi-ikebukuro, 
Toshima-ku, Tokyo, 171-0021, Japan. 2Department of Biological Sciences, 
University of Windsor, Windsor, Ontario, N9B 3P4, Canada. 3Department of Cell 
Biology, The Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, 3-18-22 Honkomagome, 
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8613, Japan

J. Cell Sci., in press

Abstract:

   Upon removal of nutrients, the amoebae of the cellular slime mold 
Dictyostelium discoideum differentiate into dormant spores which survive 
starvation stress. In this study, we demonstrate that half of the actin 
molecules in the spores are tyrosine-phosphorylated. The phosphorylated actin 
is distributed around immobile crenate mitochondria and vesicles, as well as, 
in the cytoplasm of the spores. The actin isolated from spore lysates contains 
phosphorylated and unphosphorylated forms at the same molar ratio as that of 
the original whole spore lysate. Under actin polymerizing conditions they form 
actin filaments and then they are completely depolymerized under actin 
depolymerizing conditions, indicating that tyrosine phosphorylation of actin 
may not prohibit actin polymerization nor stimulate depolymerization. The 
phosphorylation levels increase at the end of the culmination stage when 
spores have matured morphologically and physiologically, and reach maximum 
levels after an additional 12 hours of development. The levels are stable 
for 20 days following spore maturation, and decline to undetectable levels 
within the next 10 days. Spores having high levels of phosphorylation show high 
viability, and vice versa. The Dictyostelium dual-specificity kinase, splA, 
may be a candidate kinase that phosphorylates actin tyrosine during the very 
late stages in development. In spores of the splA gene null mutant, 
phosphorylation of actin is not detected by immunoblots with anti-
phosphotyrosine antibody. Following activation of spores with nutrient 
medium containing spore germination promoters, the phosphorylation levels 
quickly decrease with a half-life of about 5 minutes. After 20 minutes 
spores begin to swell. At this later time, most of the phosphorylated actin 
already has been dephosphorylated. Also, in heat-activated spores actin 
dephosphorylation occurs prior to spore swelling. However, addition of 
phosphatase inhibitors following heat-activation, prevented spore swelling 
and dephosphorylation of actin. Our data indicate that the high levels of 
actin tyrosine phosphorylation, specific to the spore stage, may be required 
for maintaining dormancy to withstand starvation stress. The rapid 
dephosphorylation of actin leads to a reactivated dynamic actin system 
which participates in spore swelling, vesicle movement, and mitochondrial 
shape changes during the spore germination process.   

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

A deubiquitinating enzyme that disassembles free polyubiquitin chains is
required for development but not growth in Dictyostelium

David F. Lindsey1, Alexander Amerik2, William J. Deery1, John D. Bishop1,
Mark Hochstrasser2, and Richard H. Gomer1

1Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Rice University, Houston, TX  77251-1892  2Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, the University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637  

Journal of Biological Chemistry, in press

Abstract

   Although cell differentiation usually involves synthesis of new proteins, 
little is known about the role of protein degradation.  In eukaryotes, 
conjugation to ubiquitin polymers often targets a protein for destruction.  
This process is regulated by deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs), which can 
disassemble ubiquitin polymerases or ubiquitin-substrate conjugates.  We 
find that a DUB, UbpA, is required for Dictyostelium development.  ubpA 
cells have normal protein profiles on gels, grow normally and show normal 
responses to starvation such as differentiation and secretion of CMF.  However, 
ubpA cells have defective aggregation, chemotaxis, cAMP relay, and cell adhesion.  
These defects result from low expression of cAMP pulse-induced genes such as 
those encoding the cAR1 cAMP receptor, phosphodiesterase, and the gp80 adhesion 
protein.  Treatment of ubpA cells with pulses of exogenous cAMP allows them to 
aggregate and express these genes like wild-type cells, but they still fail to 
develop fruiting bodies.  Unlike wild type, ubpA cells accumulates ubiquitin-
containing species that comigrate with ubiquitin polymers, suggesting a defect 
in polyubiquitin metabolism.  UbpA has sequence similarity with yeast Ubp14, 
which disassembles free ubiquitin chains.  Yeast ubp14 cells have a defect in 
proteolysis, due to excess ubiquitin chains competing for substrate binding to 
proteasomes.  Cross-species complementation and enzyme specificity assays 
indicate that UbpA and Ubp14 are functional homologs.  We suggest that specific 
developmental transitions in Dictyostelium require the degradation of specific 
proteins, and that this process in turn requires the disassembly of polyubiquitin 
chains by UbpA.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 11, number 2]

