Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 11, number 11
December 5, 1998

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

=============
  Abstracts
=============

Expression of Chicken Gizzard RLC Complements the Cytokinesis and 
Developmental Defects of Dictyostelium RLC Null Cells

Pengxin Chen, Bernard M. Chaudoir, Kathleen M. Trybusl,2, and 
Rex L. Chisholm*

Department of Cell and Molecular Biology and Robert H. Lurie 
Cancer Center, Northwestern University Medical School
303 E. Chicago Avenue
 
1Rosenstiel Basic Medical Sciences Research Center, Brandeis University
Waltham, MA 02254, 2 Current Address: Dept. of Molecular Physiology 
and Biophysics, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT 05405

J. Muscle Res. Cell Motil, in press

Abstract

   Dictyostelium RLC null cells have defects in cytokinesis and 
development that can be rescued by expression of either the wild type 
Dictyostelium RLC or an RLC mutant that cannot be phosphorylated by 
MLCK (S13A) (Ostrow et al., 1994). The wild type and S13A mutant LCs 
rescued the cells equally well, despite the fact that RLC phosphorylation 
increases purified Dictyostelium myosin's activity 5-fold. In this report 
we assess the ability of foreign RLCs to rescue the RLC null phenotype. 
The RLC from smooth muscle myosin, whose activity is tightly controlled 
by phosphorylation, rescued the null cell phenotype. The purified hybrid 
myosin had activity and motility comparable to phosphorylated Dictyostelium 
myosin. In contrast, cells expressing skeletal muscle RLC were deficient in 
cytokinesis and development, despite having an activity and motility similar 
to that of myosin with the unphosphorylatable S13A mutant RLC. Neither 
foreign LC was phosphorylated when expressed in Dictyostelium. These results 
suggest that the level of actin-activated ATPase activity and motility is 
not the sole determinant of proper myosin function in vivo. Other heavy 
chain/light chain interactions, which occur only with the native RLC and 
smooth muscle RLC, appear to be necessary for optimal function.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The mitochondrial adenine nucleotide translocator from Dictyostelium discoideum. 
Functional characterisation and DNA sequencing.

Mireille Bof, Gerard Brandolin, Michel Satre and Gerard Klein

Laboratoire de Biochimie et Biophysique des Systemes Integres (UMR 314 CEA-CNRS), 
CEA-Grenoble, France.

Eur. J. Biochem., in press

SUMMARY

   The mitochondrial adenine nucleotide translocator (ANT) catalyses the exchange 
of ATP and ADP between the mitochondria and the cytosol. We have cloned and 
sequenced the gene encoding the Dictyostelium discoideum adenine nucleotide 
translocator protein (DdANT) and analysed its transcriptional regulation. The 
single copy D. discoideum ant gene encodes a protein of 309 amino acid residues 
with a predicted molecular mass of 33469 Da and a pI of 9.85. These values are 
comparable to those of ANTs from mammals, insects or fungi. The long N-terminal 
extension characteristic of plant ANT is absent in DdANT. The protein coding 
region of the D. discoideum ant gene is interrupted by three introns. Polyclonal 
antibodies directed against the beef heart mitochondrial ANT or its C-terminal 
peptide recognised the D.  discoideum protein. Northern analysis revealed that 
the expression of the D. discoideum ant gene decreased rapidly during first 
hours of multicellular development but the amount of protein remained stable 
throughout differentiation.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dgp1 and Dfp1 are Closely Related Plasmids in the Dictyostelium Ddp2
Plasmid Family

CHAD M. GONZALES, TRINA D. SPENCER, SCOTT S. PENDLEY, AND 
DENNIS  L. WELKER1

Program in Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Utah State University,
Logan, Utah, 84322-5305

PLASMID, in press.

Summary:

   Dictyostelium plasmids Dgp1 and Dfp1, two members of the Ddp2 plasmid
family, are 86 % identical in nucleotide sequence. These small (4481 and
5015 bp), high copy number, nuclear plasmids both carry a gene homologous 
to the Ddp2 rep gene and a long 0.47 to 0.48 kb inverted  repeat region. Their
Rep proteins are 82.8% identical in amino acid sequence and carry all ten of
the conserved peptide sequence motifs found in the Ddp2 family Rep proteins.  
Unlike other members of this family, Dgp1 carries two copies and Dfp1 carries
four copies of a 162 to 166 bp direct repeat element. Both the direct and 
inverted repeat elements, as well as the promoter of the rep gene, are highly 
conserved (81 to 90% identical) between Dgp1 and Dfp1. In contrast, these 
regions are not highly conserved and the Rep proteins are only about 40% 
identical among the other known members of the plasmid family.  

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cloning of a cDNA encoding a new calcium-binding protein from Dictyostelium 
discoideum and its developmental regulation

Young-Hoon Han, Sa-Ouk Kang*

Laboratory of Biophysics, Department of Microbiology, College of Natural 
Sciences and Research Center for Molecular Microbiology, Seoul National 
University, Seoul 151-742, Republic of Korea

FEBS Lett., in press.

Abstract:

   By employing 2D-PAGE, a small protein differentially expressed during the 
development of Dictyostelium discoideum was discovered. The full cDNA of
this protein was cloned using RT-PCR technique. The deduced protein is
composed of 166 amino acids containing four EF-hand domains typical for 
calcium-binding proteins and was named CBP3. This protein shows little 
amino acid sequence homology with other calcium-binding proteins from 
Dictyostelium except EF-hand domains. The CBP3 mRNA was absent in 
vegetative amoebae and accumulated maximally at 6 h of the development 
on filters. The mRNA level decreased thereafter and disappeared after 12 h 
of the development, while the protein level peaked at 8 h of the development 
and was maintained constant thereafter. The mobility of CBP3 on SDS gel was 
shifted by the treatment of EGTA, confirming the Ca2+-binding activity of 
the protein.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Involvement of the Ca2+ ATPase PAT1 and the Contractile Vacuole in Calcium
Regulation in Dictyostelium discoideum

John Moniakis, Barrie Coukell and Agnes Janiec

Department of Biology, York University, 4700 Keele St., Toronto, Ontario,
CANADA

J. Cell Sci. in press

Abstract

   In Dictyostelium discoideum, the Ca2+ ATPase, PAT1, is localized to 
membranes of  the contractile vacuole and its expression is up-regulated 
substantially when the cells are grown in Ca2+-rich media.  In this study, 
we have analyzed the cellular/molecular mechanisms regulating  PAT1 
expression and examined the role of  PAT1 and the contractile vacuole in 
Ca2+ regulation.  During both growth and development,  Dictyostelium cells 
respond to low millimolar concentrations of extracellular Ca2+ and 
up-regulate PAT1 in a few hours.  This process is dependent on protein 
synthesis and the serine/threonine phosphatase, calcineurin. 
Immunofluorescence analysis indicates that the up-regulated PAT1 is 
associated mainly with the contractile vacuole, but it is also on the 
plasma membrane. This latter finding suggests that the contractile vacuole 
fuses with the plasma membrane to eliminate excess intracellular Ca2+.  
In support of this idea, it was observed that conditions which impair 
contractile vacuolar function  reduce the rate of  Ca2+ secretion.  It 
was also found that cells deficient in PAT1, due  to the expression of 
antisense patA RNA or to the presence of calcineurin antagonists, grow 
normally in low Ca2+ medium  but poorly or not at all  in high Ca2+.  
Together, these results suggest that PAT1 and the contractile vacuole 
are components of a Ca2+ sequestration and excretion pathway which 
functions to help maintain Ca2+  homeostasis, especially under 
conditions of  Ca2+ stress.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Dictyostelium Developmental cDNA Project: Generation and Analysis of
Expressed Sequence Tags from the First-Finger Stage of Development

Takahiro Morio(1), Hideko Urushihara(1), Tamao Saito(2), Yoshihiro 
Ugawa(3), Hideaki Mizuno(1), Motonobu Yoshida(4), Ryuji Yoshino(1), 
Biswa Nath Mitra(1), Min Pi(1), Tomihiro Sato(1), Keiko Takemoto(5), 
Hiroo Yasukawa(6), Jeffrey Williams(7), Mineko Maeda(8), Ikuo Takeuchi(9), 
Hiroshi Ochiai(2), and Yoshimasa Tanaka(1,*)

(1)Institute of Biological Sciences, Univ. Tsukuba, Japan, (2) Division of 
Biological Science, Graduate School of Sciences, Hokkaido Univ., Japan, (3)
DNA Information & Stock Center, National Institute of Agrobiological
Resources, Japan, (4) Research Institute of Food Science, Kinki Univ.,
Japan, (5) Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto Univ., Japan, (6) Faculty of
Engineering, Toyama Univ., Japan, (7) Department of Anatomy and Physiology,
University of Dundee, UK, (8) Department of Biology, Graduate School of
Science, Osaka Univ., Japan, (9) Novartis Foundation for the Promotion of
Science, Japan 

DNA Research, in press

Abstract

   In an effort to identify and characterize genes expressed during 
multicellular development in Dictyostelium, we have undertaken a cDNA 
sequencing project. Using size-fractionated subsets of cDNAs from the 
first finger stage, two sets of gridded libraries were constructed for 
cDNA sequencing. One, library S, consisting of 9984 clones, carries 
relatively short inserts. The other, library L, which consists of 8448 
clones, has longer inserts. We have sequenced all the selected clones 
in the library S from their 3’-ends and this generated 3093 non-redundant, 
expressed sequence tags (ESTs). Among them, 246 ESTs derive from known 
Dictyostelium genes and 910 are suggested to have significant similarity 
to genes of Dictyostelium or of other organisms. From the library L, 1132 
clones were randomly sequenced and this generated 471 non-redundant ESTs. 
In combination, the ESTs from the two libraries will represent 40% of genes 
expressed in late development, assuming that the non-redundant ESTs correspond 
to independent genes. They will provide a useful resource for investigating 
the genetic networks that regulate multicellular development of this organism.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 11, number 11]

  