Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 11, number 3
August 8, 1998

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

===========
 Abstracts
===========
 
SCAR, a WASP-related protein, isolated as a suppressor of receptor defects 
in late Dictyostelium development

James E. Bear , John F. Rawls, and Charles L. Saxe, III
Department of Cell Biology, Emory University School of Medicine

J. Cell Biology, in press.

Abstract

    G protein-coupled receptors trigger the reorganization of the actin 
cytoskeleton in many cell types, but the steps in this signal transduction 
cascade are poorly understood.  During Dictyostelium development, extracellular 
cAMP functions as a chemoattractant and morphogenetic signal which is transduced 
via a family of G protein-coupled receptors, the cAR's.  In a strain where the 
cAR2 receptor gene is disrupted by homologous recombination, the developmental 
program arrests prior to tip formation.  In a genetic screen for suppressors of 
this phenotype, a gene encoding a protein related to the Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome 
protein (WASP) was discovered.  Loss of this protein, which we call SCAR (for 
Suppressor of cAR), restores tip formation and most of later development to cAR2- 
strains, and causes a multiple-tip phenotype in a cAR2+ strain, as well as leading 
to the production of extremely small cells in suspension culture.  SCAR- cells have 
reduced levels of F-actin staining during vegetative growth, and abnormal cell 
morphology and actin distribution during chemotaxis.  Uncharacterized homologs of 
SCAR have also been identified in humans, mouse, C. elegans, and Drosophila.  
These data suggest SCAR may be a conserved negative regulator of G protein-coupled 
signaling and that it plays an important role in regulating the actin cytoskeleton. 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Selection of Gb Subunits with Point Mutations that Fail to Activate
Specific Signaling Pathways in vivo: Dissecting Cellular Responses
Mediated by a Heterotrimeric G protein in Dictyostelium discoideum

Tian Jin1, Mario Amzel2, Peter N Devreotes1*, Lijun Wu3

1Department of Biological Chemistry, and 2 Department of Biophysics 
and Biophysical Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 725 N.
Wolfe Street, MD21205  and 3LeukoSite, Inc., 215 First Street, Cambridge, MA 02142

Mol. Biol. Cell, in press.

Abstract

   In Dictyostelium discoideum, a unique Gb subunit is required for a G protein 
coupled receptor system that mediates a variety of cellular responses.  Binding 
of cAMP to cAR1, the receptor linked to the G protein G2 triggers a cascade of 
responses, including activation of adenylyl cyclase, gene induction, actin 
polymerization and chemotaxis.  Null mutations of the cAR1, Ga2 or Gb genes 
completely impair all these responses.  To dissect specificity in Gbg signaling 
to downstream effectors in living cells, we screened a randomly mutagenized library 
of Gb genes and isolated Gb alleles that lacked the capacity to activate some 
effectors but retained ability to regulate others.  These mutant Gb subunits 
were able to link cAR1 to G2, support gene expression, mediate cAMP-induced 
actin polymerization, and some were able to mediate to chemotaxis toward cAMP.  
None were able to activate adenylyl cyclase and some did not support chemotaxis.  
Thus, we separated in vivo functions of the Gbg by making point mutations on Gb.  
Using the structure of the heterotrimeric G protein displayed in the computer 
program (CHAIN), we examined the positions and the molecular interactions of the 
amino acids substituted in each of the mutant Gbs, and analyzed the possible 
effects of each replacement.  We identified several residues that are crucial 
for activation of the adenylyl cyclase (ACA).  These residues formed an area 
that overlaps but is not identical with regions where bovine Gtbg interacts with 
its regulators, Ga and phosducin.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Production and activity of spore differentiation factors (SDFs) in Dictyostelium

Christophe Anjard1, Wen Tsan Chang2, Julian Gross2 and Wolfgang Nellen1*

1 Universität Kassel, Abt. Genetik, Heinrich-Plett-Str. 40, D-34 132 Kassel, Germany.
2 University of Oxford, South Park Road, Oxford OX1 3 QU, England

Development, in press.

Summary

   SDF-1 and SDF-2 are peptides that promote terminal spore differentiation 
under submerged conditions. The present study shows that they accumulate 
differentially and are released during the development of wild-type cells 
and can promote spore formation in cells disaggregated from wild-type 
culminants. SDF-1 accumulates during the slug stage and is released in a 
single burst at the onset of culmination while SDF-2 accumulates during 
early culmination and is released in a single burst from mid-culminants.  
The effects of SDF-1 and SDF-2 on stalk cell formation in cell monolayers 
were investigated. SDF-1 by itself induces stalk cell formation in some 
strains and also synergizes with the stalk-cell-inducing factor, DIF-1.  
cAMP has an inhibitory effect on stalk cell formation when either DIF-1 
or SDF-1 are present on their own but is almost not inhibitory when both 
are present. SDF-2 alone does not induce stalk cell formation and appears 
to inhibit the response to DIF-1. At the same time it increases the extent 
of vacuolization of the stalk cells that are produced. We propose that 
the release of SDF-1 and then of SDF-2 may mark irreversible steps in 
the developmental programme associated respectively with culmination and 
spore maturation.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 11, number 3]

