Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 11, number 10
October 31, 1998

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

=============
  Abstracts
=============


Unusual centrosome cycle in Dictyostelium: correlation of dynamic behavior
and structural changes

Masahiro Ueda, Manfred Schliwa and Ursula Euteneuer

Adolf Butenandt Institute, Cell Biology, University of Munich, 80336
Munich, Germany

Mol.Biol. Cell, in press

Abstract

   Centrosome duplication and separation are of central importance for 
cell division. Here we provide a detailed account of this dynamic 
process in Dictyostelium. Centrosome behavior was monitored in living 
cells using a g-tubulin-GFP fusion protein and correlated with 
morphological changes at the ultrastructural level. All aspects of 
the duplication and separation process of this centrosome are unusual 
when compared to, e.g., vertebrate cells. In interphase the Dictyostelium 
centrosome is a box-shaped structure comprised of three major layers, 
surrounded by an amorphous corona from which microtubules emerge. Structural 
duplication takes place during prophase, as opposed to G1/S in vertebrate 
cells. The three layers of the box-shaped core structure increase in size. 
The surrounding corona is lost, an event accompanied by a decrease in signal 
intensity of g-tub-GFP at the centrosome and the breakdown of the interphase 
microtubule system. At the prophase/prometaphase transition the separation 
into two mitotic centrosomes takes place via an intriguing lengthwise 
splitting process where the two outer layers of the prophase centrosome 
peel away from each other and become the mitotic centrosomes. Spindle 
microtubules  are now nucleated from surfaces that previously were buried 
inside the interphase centrosome. Finally, at the end of telophase the 
mitotic centrosomes fold in such a way that the microtubule-nucleating 
surface remains on the outside of the organelle. Thus in each cell cycle 
the centrosome undergoes an apparent inside-out/outside-in reversal of 
its layered structure.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------

MODELING CHEMOTACTIC CELL SORTING DURING DICTYOSTELIUM DISCOIDEUM MOUND 
FORMATION 

Bakhtier Vasiev, Cornelis J.Weijer

Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Wellcome Trust Building,
University of Dundee, Dundee, DD1 4HN, UK 

Biophysical Journal, in press

ABSTRACT

   Coordinated cell movement is a major mechanism of the multicellular 
development of most organisms. The multicellular morphogenesis of the 
slime mould Dictyostelium discoideum, from single cells into a multicellular 
fruiting body, results from differential chemotactic cell movement. During 
aggregation cells differentiate into prestalk and prespore cells which will 
form the stalk and spores in the fruiting body. These cell types arise in a 
salt and pepper pattern after what the prestalk cells chemotactically sort 
out to form a tip.  The tip functions as an organizer since it directs the 
further development. It has been difficult to get a satisfactory formal 
description of the movement behavior of cells in tissues. Based on our 
experiments we consider the aggregate as a drop of a viscous fluid and 
show that this consideration is very well suited to mathematically describe 
the motion of cells in the tissue. We show that the transformation of a 
hemispherical mound into an elongated slug can result from the coordinated 
chemotactic cell movement in response to scroll waves of the chemoattractant 
cAMP. The model calculations furthermore show that cell sorting can result 
from differences in chemotactic cell movement and cAMP relay kinetics between 
the two cell types. During this process the faster moving and stronger signaling 
cells collect on the top of the mound to form a tip. The mound then extends 
into an elongated slug just as observed in experiments. The model is able to 
describe cell movement patterns in the complex multicellular morphogenesis of 
Dictyostelium rather well and we expect that this approach may be useful in 
the modeling of tissue transformations in other systems. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Filament structure as an essential factor for regulation of Dictyostelium
myosin by regulatory light chain phosphorylation

Xiong Liu1,2, Kohji Ito1,3, Sayuri Morimoto4, Atuko Hikkoshi-Iwane4, Toshio
Yanagida4,5 and Taro Q. P. Uyeda1 

1: Biomolecular Research Group, National Institute for Advanced
Interdisciplinary Research, Higashi 1-1-4 Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8562, Japan
2: Present address: Laboratory of Cell Biology, National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA
3: Present address: Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chiba
University, Inage, Chiba 263-8522, Japan
4: Yanagida Biomotron Project, ERATO, JST, 2-4-14 Senba-Higashi, Mino, Osaka
562, Japan
5: Department of Biophysical Engineering, Osaka University, Toyonaka, Osaka
560, Japan

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, in press.

Abstract

   Phosphorylation of the regulatory light chain (RLC) activates the 
actin-dependent ATPase activity of Dictyostelium myosin II.  To elucidate 
this regulatory mechanism, we characterized two mutant myosins, MyDC1225 and 
MyDC1528, which are truncated at Ala 1224 and Ser 1527, respectively.  These 
mutant myosins do not contain the C-terminal assembly domain, and thus are 
unable to form filaments.  Their activities were only weakly regulated by RLC 
phosphorylation, suggesting that, unlike smooth muscle myosin, efficient 
regulation of Dictyostelium myosin II requires filament assembly.  Consistent 
with this hypothesis, wild type myosin progressively lost the regulation as 
its concentration in the assay mixture was decreased.  Dephosphorylated RLC 
did not inhibit the activity when the concentration of myosin in the reaction 
mixture was very low.  Furthermore, 3xAsp myosin, which does not assemble 
efficiently due to point mutations in the tail, was also less well-regulated 
than the wild type.  We conclude that the activity in the monomer state is 
exempt from inhibition by the dephosphorylated RLC, and that the complete 
regulatory switch is formed only in the filament structure.  Interestingly, 
a chimeric myosin composed of Dictyostelium heavy meromyosin fused to chicken 
skeletal light meromyosin was not well regulated by RLC phosphorylation.  
This suggests that, in addition to filament assembly, some specific feature 
of the filament structure is required for efficient regulation.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 11, number 10]

