Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 11, number 7
October 10, 1998

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

=============
  Abstracts
=============


The Glycogen Phosphorylase-2 Promoter Binding Protein in Dictyostelium is
Replication Protein A

Xiao Wen, Pawjai Khampang, and Charles L.  Rutherford

Biology Department, Molecular and Cellular Biology Section, Virginia 
Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA 24061

J. Mol. Biol.,  in press

SUMMARY

   During Dictyostelium development, glycogen degradation is a crucial 
event that provides glucose monomers used in the synthesis of the essential 
structural components for cellular differentiation.  The product of the 
developmentally- regulated glycogen phosphorylase-2 gene (gp2) catalyzes 
the degradation.   DNA binding proteins were found to bind to a regulatory 
site of the gp2 gene in a stage-dependent pattern.  Gel-shift  analysis of 
undifferentiated amoebae cell extract revealed a protein migrating at 0.40 Rf, 
while 17 h differentiated cell extract produced a species migrating at 0.32 Rf.  
Both the 0.32 and 0.40 Rf proteins were purified and found to consist of three 
subunits of 18, 35 and 62 kDa (for 0.40 Rf) or 81 kDa (for 0.32 Rf).  Database 
searches identified the protein as the Dictyostelium homologue of replication 
protein A (DdRPA).  Amino acid sequence analysis showed identity between the 
62 and 81 kDa subunits.  Incubation of cell-free extracts under appropriate 
conditions at low pH, resulted in conversion of the 81 kDa to the 62 kDa subunit.  
Northern blot analysis revealed that the levels of expression of the large 
subunit of DdRPA were constant throughout differentiation and the size of the 
mRNA was the same at all stages of development.  The results raise the 
possibility that pH induced post-translational modifications of DdRPA are 
involved in events that halt cell proliferation and induce differentiation 
in Dictyostelium .

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Two-component Signal Transduction Systems in Eukaryotic Microorganisms

William F. Loomis, Adam Kuspa* and Gad Shaulsky#

Department of Biology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla  CA
92093   *Department of Biochemistry, and  #Department of Molecular
Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,  Houston, TX  77030

Curr. Opinions in  Microbiology (in press)

SUMMARY

Conserved signal transduction pathways using phosphorelay from histidine 
kinases through an intermediate transfer protein (H2) to response 
regulators have been found in a variety of eukaryotic microorganisms.  
Several of these pathways are linked to MAP kinase cascades. These 
networks control different physiological responses including osmoregulation, 
cAMP levels and cellular morphogenesis.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------


A NOVEL ADENYLYL CYCLASE DETECTED IN RAPIDLY DEVELOPING
MUTANTS OF DICTYOSTELIUM

Hyun-Ji Kim, Wen-Tsan Chang, Marcel Meima, Julian D. Gross and Pauline
Schaap

Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford OX13QU, UK
Cell Biology Section, Institute for Molecular Plant Sciences, University of
Leiden, 2333 AL Leiden, The Netherlands.

J. Biol. Chem., in press

SUMMARY

     Disruption of either the RDEA or REGA genes leads to rapid development
in Dictyostelium. The RDEA gene product displays homology to certain H2 type
phosphotransferases, while REGA encodes a cAMP phosphodiesterase with an
associated response regulator. It has been proposed that RDEA activates REGA
in a multi step phosphorelay. To test this proposal, we examined cAMP
accumulation in rdeA and regA null mutants and found that these mutants show
a pronounced accumulation of cAMP at the vegetative stage, that is not
observed in wild-type cells. This accumulation was due to a novel adenylyl
cyclase and not to the known Dictyostelium adenylyl cyclases, ACA or ACG,
since it occurred in an acaA/rdeA double mutant and, unlike ACG, was inhibited
by high osmolarity. The novel adenylyl cyclase was not regulated by G-proteins
and was relatively insensitive to stimulation by Mn2+ ions. Addition of the
cAMP phosphodiesterase inhibitor, 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX)
permitted detection of the novel AC activity in lysates of an  acaA/acgA double
mutant. The fact that disruption of the RDEA gene as well as inhibition of the
REGA-phoshodiesterase by IBMX permitted detection of the novel AC activity
supports the hypothesis that RDEA activates REGA. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

TWO DISTINCT SIGNALING PATHWAYS MEDIATE DIF INDUCTION OF
PRESTALK GENE EXPRESSION IN DICTYOSTELIUM

Irene Verkerke-van Wijk, Raymond Brandt, Laurens Bosman and Pauline
Schaap

Cell Biology Section, Institute for Molecular Plant Sciences, Leiden University,
Wassenaarseweg 64, 2333 AL Leiden, The Netherlands

Experimental Cell Research, in press

ABSTRACT

     During Dictyostelium development, the Differentiation Inducing Factor
(DIF) triggers  expression of the prestalk gene ecmB and induces stalk cell
differentiation, a form of programmed cell death.  The effects of DIF are
mediated by a sustained increase in cytosolic Ca2+ levels. The Ca2+-ATPase
inhibitor, BHQ, causes a similar rise in Ca2+ levels and also  induces prestalk
gene expression. We show here that Ca2+ is a specific intermediate for prestalk
gene induction, since BHQ represses transcription of the cAMP-inducible
aggregative gene PDE, the post-aggregative gene CP2, and the prespore gene
D19.  The prestalk gene  ecmA is also induced by DIF, but induction appears
to occur in two steps, which occur within 1 hour and after 2 hours respectively.
The slow step shows the same kinetics as ecmB induction and similar to ecmB
induction, this step is BHQ-inducible and requires an initial round of protein
synthesis. The fast step does not require protein synthesis and cannot be induced
by BHQ.  This indicates that in addition to the slow Ca2+-mediated pathway,
there is probably a second fast Ca2+-independent signal transduction pathway
for DIF.  


----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 11, number 7]

