Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 11, number 5
September 12, 1998

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

===========
 Abstracts
===========
 
Cytoskeletal association of an esterase in Dictyostelium discoideum

Catherine P. Chia1,*, Lothar Bomblies2, Kristy K. Taylor

1School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Lincoln, NE  68588-0118
2Max-Planck-Institüt für Biochemie, D-8033 Martinsried, Federal 
Republic of Germany

Experimental Cell Research, in press

Abstract

   A 70 kDa glycoprotein, gp70, was found enriched in the detergent-
insoluble cytoskeletal fraction of axenically-grown Dictyostelium 
discoideum cells.  Its N-terminal amino acid sequence identified 
it as ‘crystal protein’ (Bomblies, et al., 1990 J. Cell Biol. 110:669).  
This finding was corroborated when antibody to crystal protein cross-
reacted with gp70 and its deglycosylated form.  The postulated esterase 
activity of gp70/crystal protein was verified through comparative enzyme 
assays of extracts derived from cells that either overexpressed or 
lacked gp70.  Gp70 co-sedimented with cytoskeletons on sucrose gradients, 
suggesting an interaction with the cytoskeleton.  Co-isolation of gp70 
with detergent-extracted cells, observed by immunofluorescence microscopy, 
also implied a gp70-cytoskeletal association.  These data supported the 
idea that the localization or secretion of gp70, or both, was 
cytoskeletally-mediated.  Although axenically-grown cells contained 
high levels of gp70, the same cell lines had reduced levels of gp70 
when grown in bacterial suspension or in nutrient media containing 
bacteria.  Bacterially-grown cells, compared to axenically-grown cells, 
had lower fluid-phase uptake rates even when nutrient media was present, 
indicating that phagocytosis was a preferred mode of feeding.  Thus, 
bacteria inhibited gp70 expression, which suggested a role for 
prestarvation factor, in regulating its synthesis.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Identification of Darlin, a Dictyostelium Protein with Armadillo-like 
Repeats that Binds to Small GTPases and is Important for the Proper 
Aggregation of Developing Cells.


Kalpa K. Vithalani, Carole A. Parent, Eric M. Thorn, Marcus Penn, 
Denis A. Larochelle, Peter N. Devreotes and Arturo De Lozanne

Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC 27710

Mol. Biol. Cell, in press

Abstract:

   We purified from Dictyostelium lysates an 88 kDa protein that bound 
to a subset of small GTPases including racE, racC, cdc42Hs, and TC4ran, 
but did not bind to R-ras or rabB.   Cloning of the gene encoding this 
88 kDa protein revealed that it contained multiple armadillo-like repeats 
most closely related to the mammalian GTP exchange factor smgGDS.  We 
named this protein darlin (Dictyostelium armadillo-like protein).  
Disruption of the gene encoding darlin demonstrated that this protein 
is not essential for cytokinesis, pinocytosis, phagocytosis or development.  
However, the ability of darlin null cells to aggregate in response to 
starvation is severely affected.  When starved under liquid medium, the 
mutant cells were unable to form aggregation centers and streams, possibly 
due to a defect in cAMP relay signaling.  This defect was not due to an 
inability of the darlin mutants to activate adenylate cyclase in response 
to G protein stimulation.  These results suggest that the darlin protein 
is involved in a signaling pathway that may modulate the chemotactic 
response during early development. 

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dictyostelium TRFA Homologous to Yeast Ssn6 is Required for Normal Growth an
d Early Development

Junichi Saito, Takahide Kon, Akira Nagasaki, Hiroyuki Adachi, and Kazuo Sutoh

Department of Life Sciences, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, University 
of Tokyo, 3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153, Japan

J. Biol. Chem., in  press

Abstract

   The TPR (tetratricopeptide repeat) family became widespread during 
evolution, being found from bacteria to mammalians. By means of restriction
enzyme-mediated integration (REMI), we have identified a Dictyostelium gene 
(trfA) highly homologous to a Saccharomyces cerevisiae gene encoding a TPR 
protein, Ssn6 (Cyc8), which functions as a global transcriptional repressor 
for diverse genes. The deduced amino acid sequence of the Dictyostelium gene 
product, TRFA, contains ten consecutive TPR units as well as Gln repeats, Asn 
repeats, and a region rich in Glu, Lys, Ser and Thr. The sequences of some of 
the ten TPR units in TRFA are more than 70% identical to the corresponding 
units in Ssn6.  The trfA- cells produced smooth plaques on a bacterial lawn, 
and also failed to aggregate normally when starved on a plain agar plate.  
Individual cells showed weaker chemotactic responces to cAMP, although adenylyl 
cyclases of the trfA- cells were activated by cAMP as in the wild-type cells. 
In a rich medium, they grew more slowly and stopped growing at a lower density 
than the wild-type cells. Furthermore, they divided into cells of various sizes 
and tended to be much smaller than the wild-type cells. These pleiotropic 
defects of the trfA- cells suggest the possibility that Dictyostelium TRFA 
may regulate the transcription of diverse genes required for normal growth 
and early development.


-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Underexpression of a Novel Gene, Dia2, Impairs the Transition of 
Dictyostelium Cells from Growth to Differentiation

Soo-Choen Chae*, Yuji Inazu, Aiko Amagai, and Yasuo Maeda1

Biological Institute, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University, 
Aoba, Sendai 980-8578, Japan

Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., in press

Abstract
   
   In Dictyostelium discoideum Ax-2 cells, a specific point (PS-point) 
in the cell cycle from which they initiate differentiation in response to 
starvation has been specified. Using synchronized Ax-2 cells and the 
differential display method, a novel gene (differentiation-associated 
gene 2; dia2) was isolated as one of genes expressed specifically during 
the shift of Ax-2 cells from growth to differentiation. The dia2 gene codes 
a lysine- and leucine-rich protein with a predicted molecular mass of 16.9 
kDa. Northern blot analys is has shown that the dia2 mRNA, of 0.7kb, 
accumulates in differentiating cells starved just before the PS-point, while 
that there is no detectable expression in vegetatively growing cells.  Antisense-
mediated gene inactivation of dia2 greatly inhibited the progress of 
differentiation, presumably through the reduced expression of cAMP receptor 
1 (car1). Thus, the DIA2 expression was suggested to have an essential role 
in the initiation of differentiation , closely relating to the cAMP signaling 
system.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

A Molecular Network that Produces Spontaneous Oscillations in Excitable
Cells of Dictyostelium

Michael T. Laub and William F. Loomis

Center for Molecular Genetics, Department of Biology, University of 
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093

Mol. Biol. Cell, in press

Abstract

   A network of interacting proteins has been found that can account 
for the spontaneous oscillations in adenylyl cyclase activity that 
are observed in homogenous populations of Dictyostelium cells 4 hours 
after the initiation of development.  Previous biochemical assays 
have shown that when extracellular cAMP binds to the surface receptor, 
CAR1, the adenylyl cyclase, ACA, and the MAP kinase, ERK2, are 
transiently activated.  A rise in the internal concentration of cAMP 
activates protein kinase A, PKA, such that it inhibits ERK2 and leads 
to a loss-of-ligand binding by CAR1. ERK2 phosphorylates the cAMP 
phosphodiesterase, REG A, that reduces the internal concentration of 
cAMP. A secreted phosphodiesterase, PDE, reduces external cAMP 
concentrations between pulses. Numerical solutions to a series of 
nonlinear differential equations describing these activities faithfully 
account for the observed periodic changes in cAMP. The activity of 
each of the components is necessary for the network to generate 
oscillatory behavior, however, the model is robust in that 25 fold 
changes in the kinetic constants linking the activities have only 
minor effects on the predicted frequency. Moreover, constant high 
levels of external cAMP lead to attenuation while a brief pulse of 
cAMP can advance or delay the phase such that interacting cells 
become entrained.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 11, number 5]

