Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 11, number 1
July 11, 1998

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

===========
 Abstracts
===========
 
Inhibition of the cAMP dependent protein kinase by synthetic A-helix peptides

Stéphane Gamboni, Catherine Chaperon, Kirstin Friedrich§,
Pascal J. Baehler, Christophe D. Reymond

Insitut de biologie cellulaire et de morphologie, Rue du Bugnon 9,
CH-1005 Lausanne, Switzerland
§ EPFL, Laboratoire de chimie physique des polymères et membranes,
CH-1015 Lausanne.

BIOCHEMISTRY (In Press)

Abstract:

The catalytic subunit of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase from 
Dictyostelium discoideum, PkaC, displays the same properties as its 
mammalian counterpart, except for being about twice as large in size. 
Sequence comparisons indicated the presence of a conserved a-helix 
(A-helix) within the N-terminal region of PkaC which could potentially 
establish close contacts with the catalytic core (1). We show in this 
report that a synthetic peptide with the A-helix sequence inhibits 
PKA activity, whereas unrelated peptides display no inhibitory activity. 
The inhibition seems competitive with respect to the kemptide substrate 
rather than due to binding to a secondary site. We further show by amino 
acid replacements that the last lysine of the A-helix sequence is 
involved in this specific inhibition. A model is proposed for the 
possible role of the A-helix.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Interaptin, an actin-binding protein of the a-actinin superfamily in
Dictyostelium discoideum, is developmentally and cAMP-regulated and
associates with intracellular  membrane compartments 

Francisco Rivero1,2, Adam Kuspa3, Regine Brokamp1, Monika Matzner1 and
Angelika A. Noegel1,2,4
1Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie, Am Klopferspitz 18a, 82152 Martinsried,
Germany. 2Institut für Biochemie I, Medizinische Fakultät, Universität zu
Köln, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 52, 50931 Köln, Germany
3Department of Biochemistry, Baylor College of Medicine, 1 Baylor Plaza,
Houston, TX 77030

Journal of Cell Biology, in press.

In a search for novel members of the a-actinin superfamily a D. discoideum 
genomic library in YACs was screened under low stringency conditions using 
the acting-binding domain of the gelation factor as probe. A new locus was 
identified and 8.6 kb of genomic DNA were sequenced that encompassed the 
whole abpD gene. The DNA sequence predicts a protein, interaptin, with a 
calculated molecular mass of 204,300 that is constituted by an actin-binding 
domain, a central coiled-coil rod domain and a membrane-associated domain. 
In Northern blot analyses a cAMP-stimulated transcript of 5.8 kb is expressed 
at the stage when cell differentiation occurs. Monoclonal antibodies raised 
against bacterially expressed interaptin polypeptides recognized a 200 kD 
developmentally and cAMP-regulated protein and a 160 kD constitutively 
expressed protein in Western blots. In multicellular structures interaptin 
appears to be enriched in anterior-like cells which during culmination sort 
to the upper and lower cups. The protein is located at the nuclear envelope 
and ER. In mutants deficient in interaptin development is delayed, but the 
morphology of the mature fruiting bodies appears normal. When starved in 
suspension abpD- cells form EDTA-stable aggregates, which, in contrast to 
wild type, dissociate. Based on its domains and location interaptin 
constitutes a potential link between intracellular membrane compartments 
and the actin cytoskeleton.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Kinetic Characterization of Myosin Head Fragments with Long-lived
Myosin.ATP States 

A. L. Friedman(1), M. A. Geeves(2), D. J. Manstein(3), and J. A.
Spudich*(1)

Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, California,
94305, Max-Planck-Institut fur Molekulare Physiologie, Postfach 102644,
D-44026 Dortmund, and Max-Planck-Institut fur Medizinische Forschung,
Jahnstrasse 29, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany

Biochemistry, in press.

ABSTRACT:  

We have separately expressed the D. discoideum myosin II nonhydrolyzer 
point mutations E459V and E476K [Ruppel, K. M. and Spudich, J. A. (1996) 
Mol. Biol. Cell 7, 1123-1136.] in the soluble myosin head fragment M761-1R 
[Anson et al. (1996) EMBO J. 15, 6069-6074] and performed transient kinetic 
analyses to characterize the ATPase cycles of the mutant proteins.  While 
the mutations cause some changes in mantATP (2’(3’)-O-(N-methylanthraniloyl)
-ATP) and mantADP binding, the most dramatic effect is on the hydrolysis 
step of the ATPase cycle, which is reduced by four (E476K) and six (E459V) 
orders of magnitude.  Thus both mutant myosin constructs do in fact catalyze 
ATP hydrolysis but have very long-lived myosin.ATP states.  The E459V mutation 
allowed for a direct measurement of the ATP off rate constant from myosin, 
which was found to be 2 x 10-5 s-1.  Actin accelerated ATP release from this 
E459V construct by at least 100-fold.  Additionally, we found that the affinity 
of the E476K construct for actin is significantly weaker than for the wild-type 
construct, while the E459V mutant interacts with actin normally. Their functional 
properties and the fact that they can be produced and purified in large amounts 
makes the E476K and E459V constructs ideal tools to elucidate key structural 
features of the myosin ATPase cycle.  These constructs should allow us to address 
important questions, including how binding of ATP to myosin heads results in a 
>3 order of magnitude reduction in actin affinity.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

A Novel Component Involved in Ubiquitination is Required for Development of
Dictyostelium discoideum

Stefan  Pukatzki, Nelson Tordilla,  Jakob Franke, and Richard H. Kessin

Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Physicians & Surgeons, 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, U.S.A.

Journal of Biological Chemistry. In Press.

Abstract

   A novel component of the ubiquitination system, called NOSA, is essential 
for cellular differentiation in Dictyostelium discoideum. Disruption of nosA 
does not affect the growth rate but causes an arrest in development after the 
cells have aggregated. NosA contains seven exons, and codes for a develop-
mentally regulated 3.5-kb mRNA. The 125-kD NOSA protein is present in the 
cytosol at constant levels during growth and development. The C-terminal 
region of NOSA has homology with UFD2 of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and putative 
homologs in Caenorhabditis elegans and humans. UFD2 is involved in the 
ubiquitin-mediated degradation of model substrates in which ubiquitin forms 
part of the translation product, but ufd2 mutants have no detected phenotype. 
In accord with the homology to UFD2, we found differences in ubiquitination 
pattern between nosA mutants and their parental cell line. While general in 
vivo and in vitro ubiquitination is minimally affected, ubiquitination of 
individual proteins is altered throughout growth and development in nosA 
mutants. These findings suggest that events involving ubiquitination are 
critical for progression through the aggregate stage of the Dictyostelium 
life cycle.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Temperature-sensitive Gbeta mutants Discriminate Between G-protein Dependent
and G-protein Independent Signaling Mediated by Serpentine Receptors.

Tian Jin1, Ron D. M. Soede2, Jingchun Liu3, Alan R. Kimmel3, Peter N.
Devreotes1 and Pauline Schaap2*

1Department of Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, 725 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21205. 
2Cell Biology Section, Institute for Molecular Plant Sciences, University of
Leiden, The Netherlands.
3Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Biology, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

EMBO J. in press

ABSTRACT
     Deletion of the single gene for the Dictyostelium G-protein beta-subunit
blocks development at an early stage. We have now isolated
temperature-sensitive alleles of G-beta to investigate its role in later
development. We show that G-beta is directly required for adenylyl cyclase A
activation and for morphogenetic signaling during the entire developmental
program.  G-beta was also essential for induction of aggregative gene expression
by cAMP pulses, a process that is mediated by serpentine cAMP receptors 
(cARs). However, G-beta was not required for cAR-mediated induction of
prespore genes and repression of stalk genes and neither was G-beta needed for
induction of prestalk genes by the stalk-inducing morphogen, DIF. cAMP
induction of prespore genes and repression of stalk genes is mediated by the
protein kinase GSK-3. GSK-3 also determines cell-type specification in insects
and vertebrates and is regulated by the wingless/wnt morphogens that are
detected by serpentine fz receptors. The G-protein dependent and independent
modes of cAR-mediated signaling reported here may also exist for the
wingless/wnt signaling pathways in higher organisms.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

FUNCTIONAL PROMISCUITY OF GENE REGULATION BY SERPENTINE RECEPTORS IN 
DICTYOSTELIUM 

Irene Verkerke-Van Wijk1, Ji-Yun Kim2, Raymond Brandt1, Peter N.
Devreotes2 and Pauline Schaap1*

1.Cell Biology Section, Institute for Molecular Plant Sciences, University of
Leiden,   Wassenaarseweg 64, 2333 AL Leiden, The Netherlands.
2.Department of Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA

Molecular and Cellular Biology in press.

SUMMARY
     Serpentine receptors as smoothened and frizzled play important roles in
cell fate determination during animal development. In Dictyostelium, four
serpentine cAMP receptors (cARs) regulate expression of multiple classes of
developmental genes. To understand their function, it is essential to know
whether each cAR is coupled to a specific gene regulatory pathway or whether
specificity results from the different developmental regulation of  individual
cARs.  To distinguish between these possibilities, we measured gene induction
in car1-/car3- cell lines, that express equal levels of either cAR1, cAR2 or
cAR3 under a constitutive promoter. We found that all cARs efficiently mediate
both aggregative gene induction by cAMP pulses as well as induction of
postaggregative and prespore genes by persistent cAMP stimulation. Two
exceptions to this functional promiscuity were observed: i. Only cAR1 can
mediate adenosine inhibition of cAMP-induced prespore gene expression, a
phenomenon that was found earlier in wild-type cells. This suggest that cAR1
normally mediates prespore gene induction. ii. Only cAR2 allows entry into the
prestalk pathway. Prestalk gene expression is induced by the lipophilic signal
DIF, but only after cells have been prestimulated with cAMP. We found that
DIF-induced prestalk gene expression is 10 times higher in constitutive cAR2
expressors than in constitutive cAR1 or cAR3 expressors (which still have
endogenous cAR2), suggesting that cAR2 mediates induction of DIF
competence.  Since in wild-type slugs, cAR2 is only expressed in anterior cells,
this could explain the thusfar puzzling observation that prestalk cells
differentiate at the anterior, while DIF levels are higher at the posterior region.
After the initial induction of DIF competence, cAMP becomes a repressor of
prestalk gene expression. This function can again be mediated by  cAR1, cAR2
and cAR3.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Cell Type Specific Rescue of Myosin Function During Dictyostelium 
Development Defines Two Distinct Cell Movements Required for Culmination

Tung-Ling L. Chen, Wendy A. Wolf and Rex L. Chisholm

Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Northwestern University 
Medical School, Chicago, IL 60611

Development, in press.

SUMMARY

   Mutant Dictyostelium cells lacking any of the component polypeptides 
of myosin II exhibit developmental defects.  To define myosin's role in 
establishing Dictyostelium’s developmental pattern, we have rescued myosin 
function in a myosin regulatory light chain null mutant (mlcR-) using cell 
type specific promoters.  While mlcR- cells fail to progress beyond the 
mound stage, expression of RLC from the prestalk promoter, ecmA, produces 
culminants with normal stalks but with defects in spore cell localization.  
When GFP marked prestalk and prespore cells expressing ecmA-RLC are mixed 
with wildtype cells, the mislocalization of prestalk cells, but not prespore 
cells, is rescued.  Time-lapse video recording of ecmA-RLC cells showed that 
the posterior prespore zone failed to undergo a contraction important for the 
upward movement of prespore cells.  Prespore cells marked with green fluorescent 
protein (GFP) failed to move toward the tip with the spiral motion typical of 
wildtype.  In contrast, expression of RLC in prespore cells using the psA 
promoter produced balloon-like structures reminiscent of sorocarps but 
lacking stalks.  GFP-labeled prespore cells showed a spiral movement 
toward the top of the structures.  Expression of RLC from the psA promoter 
restores the normal localization of psA-GFP cells, but not ecmA-GFP cells.  
These results define two distinct, myosin-dependent movements that are 
required for establishing a Dictyostelium fruiting body: stalk extension 
and active movement of the prespore zone that ensures proper placement of 
the spores atop the stalk.  The approach used in these studies provides 
a direct means of testing the role of cell motility in distinct cell types 
during a morphogenetic program.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 11, number 1]

