Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 11, number 8
October 24, 1998

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

=============
  Abstracts
=============

Dissection of the cAMP induced cytosolic calcium response in Dictyostelium
discoideum: the role of cAMP receptor subtypes and G protein subunits

Jürgen Sonnemann, Annette Aichem and Christina Schlatterer

Fakultät für Biologie, Universität Konstanz, D-78457 Konstanz

FEBS Letters, in press

Abstract

    The cAMP signaling cascade leading to changes in [Ca2+]i in Dictyostelium 
discoideum was analyzed using cell lines overexpressing single cAMP receptor 
subtypes (cAR1-cAR3) or lacking the Galpha2 or Gbeta subunit of the G-protein. 
Imaging of fura2-dextran-loaded amoebae revealed cAMP-induced [Ca2+]i-changes 
characteristic for each receptor subtype activated. Cells expressing distinct 
subtypes sort to defined zones during multicellular development suggesting 
involvement of the specific [Ca2+]i-transients in patterning processes. Whereas 
generation of the [Ca2+]i-increase was Galpha2-independent, only few cells 
devoid of Gbeta displayed a [Ca2+]i-change after stimulation indicating its 
participation in the regulation of the calcium homeostasis. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A computational model of ameboid deformation and locomotion

Dean C. Bottino *(University of Utah) and Lisa J. Fauci (Tulane University)

European Biophysics Journal (1998) 27:532-539

Abstract:

   Traditional continuum models of ameboid deformation and locomotion are 
limited by the computational difficulties intrinsic in free boundary 
conditions.  A new model using the immersed boundary method overcomes 
these difficulties by representing the cell as a force field immersed 
in a  fluid domain.  The forces can be derived from a direct mechanical 
interpretation of such cell components as the cell membrane, the actin 
cortex, and the transmembrane adhesions between the cytoskeleton and the 
substratum.  The numerical cytoskeleton, modeled as a dynamic network of 
immersed springs, is able to qualitatively  model  the passive mechanical 
behavior of a shear-thinning viscoelastic fluid (Bottino, J. Comp. Phys., 
147,1(1998)).  The same network is used to generate active protrusive  
and contractile forces.   When coordinated with the attachment-detachment 
cycle of the  cell’s adhesions to the substratum, these forces produce 
directed locomotion of the model ameba.  With this model it is possible 
to study the effects of altering the  numerical parameters upon the  
motility of the model cell in a manner suggestive of genetic deletion 
experiments.  In the context of this  ameboid cell model and its 
numerical implementation, simulations involving multicellular interaction, 
detailed internal signaling, and complex substrate geometries are  tractable.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Random insertion of GFP into the cAMP dependent protein kinase regulatory 
subunit from Dictyostelium discoideum

Ricardo M. Biondi,1 Pascal J. Baehler,2 Christophe D. Reymond2,** 
and Michel Véron1

*Unité de Régulation Enzymatique des Activités Cellulaires, CNRS-URA 
1773, Institut Pasteur, 25 rue du Dr. Roux, 75724, Paris Cedex 15, France
2Institut de Biologie Cellulaire et de Morphologie, Université de Lausanne, 
rue du Bugnon 9, CH-1005 Lausanne, Switzerland

Footnote: The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the 
first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors

NUCLEIC ACIDS RESEARCH (In Press)

ABSTRACT

   The green fluorescent protein (GFP) is currently being used for diverse 
cellular biology approaches, mainly as a protein tag or to monitor gene 
expression. Recently it has been shown that GFP can also be used to monitor 
the activation of second messenger pathways by the use of fluorescence 
resonance energy transfer (FRET) between two different GFP mutants fused 
to a Ca2+ sensor. We show here that GFP fusions can also be used to obtain 
informations on regions essential for protein function. As FRET requires 
the two GFP's to be very close, N- or C- terminal fusion proteins will not 
generally produce FRET between two interacting proteins. In order to increase 
the probability of FRET, we decided to study the effect of random insertion 
of two GFP mutants into a protein of interest. We describe here a methodology 
for random insertion of GFP into the cAMP dependent protein kinase regulatory 
subunit using a bacterial expression vector. The selection and analysis of 
120 green fluorescent colonies revealed that the insertions were distributed 
throughout the R coding region. 14 R/GFP fusion proteins were partially 
purified and characterized for cAMP binding, fluorescence and ability to 
inhibit PKA catalytic activity. This study reveals that GFP insertion only 
moderately disturbed the overall folding of the protein or the proper folding 
of another domain of the protein, as tested by cAMP binding capacity. Furthermore, 
three R subunits out of 14, which harbour a GFP inserted in the cAMP binding 
site B, inhibit PKA catalytic subunit in a cAMP dependent manner. Random insertion 
of GFP within the R subunit sets the path to develope two component FRET with the 
C subunit.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

DISRUPTION OF A DYNAMIN HOMOLOGUE AFFECTS ENDOCYTOSIS, ORGANELLE MORPHOLOGY 
AND CYTOKINESIS IN DICTYOSTELIUM DISCOIDEUM

Dirk C. Wienke*, Menno L.W. Knetsch*, Eva M. Neuhaus§, Mary C. Reedy,
and Dietmar J. Manstein*

* Abteilung Biophysik, Max-Planck-Institut für Medizinische Forschung, 
Jahnstr. 29, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany; § Abteilung Molekulare Zellforschung, 
Max-Planck-Institut für Medizinische Forschung, Jahnstr. 29, D-69120 
Heidelberg, Germany; Dept. of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, 
Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Mol. Biol. Cell, in press

SUMMARY
The identification and functional characterization of Dictyostelium 
discoideum dynamin A, a protein composed of 853 amino acids, that shares 
up to 44% sequence identity with other dynamin-related proteins is described. 
Dynamin A is present during all stages of D. discoideum development and is 
predominantly found in the cytosolic fraction and in association with endosomal 
and post-lysosomal vacuoles. Overexpression of the protein has no adverse 
effect on the cells while depletion of dynamin A by gene targeting techniques 
leads to multiple and complex phenotypic changes. Cells lacking a functional 
copy of dymA show alterations of mitochondrial, nuclear, and endosomal 
morphology and a defect in fluid-phase uptake. They also become multinucleated 
due to a failure to complete normal cytokinesis. These pleiotropic effects of 
dynamin A-depletion can be rescued by complementation with the cloned gene. 
Morphological studies using cells producing GFP-dynamin A revealed that dynamin 
A associates with punctate cytoplasmic vesicles. Double-labeling with vacuolin, 
a marker of a post-lysosomal compartment in D. discoideum, showed an almost 
complete colocalization of vacuolin and dynamin A. Our results suggest that 
that dynamin A is likely to function in membrane trafficking processes along 
the endo-lysosomal pathway of D. discoideum but not at the plasma membrane. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

NUCLEAR PLASMIDS OF DICTYOSTELIUM

Joanne E. Hughes and Dennis L. Welker

Department of Biology, Utah State University, Logan, Utah 84322-5305

Genetic Engineering, Volume 21, in press (1999)

This is a review of the information to date on the nuclear plasmids from 
cellular slime molds. It covers basic plasmid characterization, plasmid 
families, plasmid maintenance functions, other potential plasmid functions, 
and extrachromosomal vectors. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 11, number 8]

