Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 20, number 2
February 15, 2003

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been 
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other 
useful information is available at DictyBase--http://dictybase.org.

=============
  Abstracts
=============

DIF-1, an anti-tumor substance found in Dictyostelium discoideum, 
inhibits progesterone-induced oocyte maturation in Xenopus laevis 

Yuzuru Kuboharaa*, Yoichi Hanaoka, Emi Akaishi, Hisae Kobayashi, 
Mineko Maeda, Kohei Hosaka 

Biosignal Research Center, Institute for Molecular and Cellular 
Regulation (IMCR), Gunma University, Maebashi 371-8512, Japan 

European Journal of Pharmacology, In press 

Abstract 

Differentiation-inducing factor-1 (DIF-1; 1-(3,5-dichloro-2,6-dihydroxy-
4-methoxyphenyl)hexan-1-one) is a putative morphogen that induces stalk-
cell formation in the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum. DIF-1 
has previously been shown to suppress cell growth in mammalian cells. In 
this study, we examined the effects of DIF-1 on the progesterone-induced 
germinal vesicle breakdown in Xenopus laevis, which is thought to be 
mediated by a decrease in intracellular cAMP and the subsequent activation 
of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and maturation-promoting factor, 
a complex of cdc2 and cyclin B, which regulates germinal vesicle breakdown. 
DIF-1 at 10-40 micro M inhibited progesterone-induced germinal vesicle 
breakdown in de-folliculated oocytes in a dose-dependent manner. 
Progesterone-induced cdc2 activation, MAPK activation, and c-Mos 
accumulation were inhibited by DIF-1. Furthermore, DIF-1 was found to 
inhibit the progesterone-induced cAMP decrease in the oocytes. These 
results indicate that DIF-1 inhibits progesterone-induced germinal vesicle 
breakdown possibly by blocking the progesterone-induced decrease in 
[cAMP]i and the subsequent events in Xenopus oocytes. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The AP-1 clathrin-adaptor is required for lysosomal enzymes sorting and 
biogenesis of the contractile vacuole complex in Dictyostelium cells 

Yaya Lefkir,* Benot de Chassey,* Annick Dubois,* Aleksandra Bogdanovic, 
Rebecca J. Brady, Olivier Destaing, Franz bruckert, Theresa J. 
O'halloran, Pierre Cosson, and Franois Letourneur*# 

* Institut de Biologie et Chimie des Protines, UMR5086 - CNRS/Universit 
Lyon I 7, Passage du Vercors, 69367 Lyon cedex 07, France; Laboratoire de 
Biochimie et Biophysique des Systmes Intgrs, 38054 Grenoble Cedex 9, 
France; 241 Patterson Laboratories, Section of Molecular Cell & Developmental 
Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, 24th St. and Speedway Avenue, 
Austin, TX 78712, USA; Laboratoire de Biologie Molculaire et Cellulaire 
/ UMR 5665 Ecole Normale Suprieure de Lyon, 69364 LYON Cedex 07, France; 
Universit de Genve, Centre Mdical Universitaire, Dpartement de 
Morphologie, CH-1211 Genve 4, Switzerland 

Molecular Biology of the Cell, In Press 

ABSTRACT 

Adaptor protein complexes (AP) are major components of the cytoplasmic 
coat found on clathrin-coated vesicles. Here, we report the molecular and 
functional characterization of Dictyostelium clathrin-associated AP-1 
complex, which in mammalian cells, participates mainly in budding of 
clathrin-coated vesicles from the trans-Golgi network (TGN). The g-adaptin 
AP-1 subunit was cloned and shown to belong to a Golgi-localized 300kDa 
protein complex. Time-lapse analysis of cells expressing g-adaptin tagged 
with the green-fluorescent-protein demonstrates the dynamics of AP-1 
coated structures leaving the Golgi apparatus and rarely moving towards 
the TGN. Targeted disruption of the AP-1 medium chain results in viable 
cells displaying a severe growth defect and a delayed developmental cycle 
as compared to parental cells. Lysosomal enzymes are constitutively 
secreted as precursors, suggesting that protein transport between the 
TGN and lysosomes is defective. Whereas endocytic protein markers are 
correctly localized to endosomal compartments, morphological and 
ultrastructural studies reveal the absence of large endosomal vacuoles 
and an increased number of small vacuoles. In addition, the function of 
the contractile vacuole complex (CV), an osmoregulatory organelle is 
impaired and some CV components are not correctly targeted. 

submitted by: Francois Letourneur [f.letourneur@ibcp.fr]

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Title:  Analysis of 5  Nucleotidase and Alkaline Phosphatase by Gene 
Disruption in Dictyostelium

Charles L. Rutherford*, Danielle F. Overall, Muatasem Ubeidat and 
Bradley R. Joyce

Biology Department, Molecular and Cellular Biology Section, Virginia 
Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA 24061-0406, USA

Genesis, In Press

Abstract

In Dictyostelium discoideum  a phosphatase with a high pH optimum is known 
to increase in activity during cell differentiation and become localized 
to a narrow band of cells at the interface of prespore and prestalk cells.  
However, it was not clear if this activity is due to a classical  alkaline 
phosphatase  with broad range substrate specificity or to a 
 5 nucleotidase  with high substrate preference for 5 AMP.  We attempted 
to disrupt the genes encoding these two phosphatase activities in order 
to determine if the activity that is localized to the interface region 
resides in either of these two proteins.  During aggregation of 5nt null 
mutants multiple tips formed rather than the normal single tip for each 
aggregate.  In situ phosphatase activity assays showed that the wt and 
the 5nt gene disruption clones had normal phosphatase activity in the 
area between prestalk and prespore cell types, while the alp null mutants 
did not have activity in this cellular region.  Thus, the phosphatase 
activity that becomes localized to the interface of the prestalk and 
prespore cells is Alkaline Phosphatase.

Submitted by rutherfo@vt.edu

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

ADENYLYL CYCLASE LOCALIZATION REGULATES STREAMING DURING 
CHEMOTAXIS 

Paul W. Kriebel, Valarie A. Barr, and Carole A. Parent*

Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology, National Cancer Institute, 
National Institutes of Health 

Cell, In press.

We studied the role of the adenylyl cyclase ACA in D. discoideum chemotaxis 
and streaming. In this process cells orient themselves in a head to tail 
fashion as they are migrating to form aggregates. We show that cells lacking 
ACA are capable of moving up a chemoattractant gradient, but are unable to 
stream. Imaging of ACA-YFP reveals plasma membrane labeling highly enriched 
at the uropod of polarized cells. This localization requires the actin 
cytoskeleton but is independent of the regulator CRAC and the effector PKA. 
A constitutively active mutant of ACA shows dramatically reduced uropod 
enrichment and has severe streaming defects. We propose that the asymmetric 
distribution of ACA provides a compartment from which cAMP is secreted to 
locally act as a chemoattractant, thereby providing a unique mechanism to 
amplify chemical gradients. This could represent a general mechanism that 
cells use to amplify chemotactic responses.

submitted by Carole Parent [parentc@helix.nih.gov]

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Characterization of  a cAMP-stimulated cAMP phosphodiesterase in 
Dictyostelium discoideum

Marcel E. Meima, Karin E. Weening and Pauline Schaap

School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, MSI/WTB complex, Dow Street, 
Dundee DD1 5EH, UK.

SUMMARY

A cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase,  PdeE,  that harbours two cyclic 
nucleotide  binding motifs and a binuclear Zn2+ binding domain, was 
characterized in Dictyostelium.  In other eukaryotes, the Dictyostelium 
domain shows  greatest homology to the 73 kD subunit of the premRNA cleavage 
and polyadenylation specificity factor. The Dictyostelium PdeE gene is 
expressed at highest levels during aggregation and its disruption causes 
the loss of a cAMP-phosphodiesterase activity. The pdeE null mutants show 
a normal cAMP-induced cGMP response and  a 1.5-fold increase of cAMP-induced 
cAMP relay. Overexpression of a PdeE-YFP1 fusion construct causes inhibition 
of aggregation and loss of the cAMP relay response, but the cells can 
aggregate in synergy with wild-type cells. The PdeE-YFP fusion protein was 
partially purified by immuno-precipitation and biochemically characterized. 
PdeE and its Dictyostelium ortholog PdeD are both maximally active at pH 7.0. 
Both enzymes require bivalent cations for activity. The common cofactors Zn2+ 
and Mg2+ activated PdeE and PdeD maximally at 10 mM, while Mn2+ activated the 
enzymes to 4-fold higher levels, with half-maximal activation between 10 
and 100 M. PdeE is an allosteric enzyme, which is about 4-fold activated by 
cAMP, with half-maximal activation occurring at about  10 M and an apparent 
KM around 1 mM. cGMP is degraded at a 6-fold lower rate than cAMP. Neither 
cGMP nor 8BrcAMP are efficient activators of PdeE activity.

submitted by Pauline Schaap [p.schaap@dundee.ac.uk]

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Differentiation-inducing factor-1 (DIF-1) inhibits STAT3 activity involved 
in gastric cancer cell proliferation via MEK-ERK-dependent pathway.

Kanai M, Konda Y, Nakajima T, Izumi Y, Kanda N, Nanakin A, Kubohara Y, 
Chiba T.

Kyoto University School of Medicine, Gunma University IMCR

Oncogene (2003) 22, 548-554.

Differentiation-inducing factor-1 (DIF-1) is a chlorinated hexaphenone 
isolated from Dictyostelium. DIF-1 exhibits antitumor activity in several 
types of mammalian tumor cells, although the underlying mechanisms remain 
unknown. On the other hand, recent studies indicate that constitutively 
activated STAT3 acts as an oncogene and could be a target for antitumor 
drug. In the present study, we examined the effects of DIF-1 on 
proliferation of gastric cancer cell lines as well as on its signal 
transduction pathways, focusing mainly on STAT proteins. DIF-1 inhibited 
proliferation of gastric cancer cells. Western blot analysis and 
electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed that DIF-1 inhibited STAT3 
activity in an MEK-ERK-dependent manner in gastric cancer cell lines, 
AGS and MKN28. Moreover, blockade of STAT3 activity by ectopic expression 
of dominant-negative STAT3 or the Janus kinase inhibitor, tyrphostin 
AG490, inhibited cell growth of AGS cells. These results suggest that 
STAT3 activity plays an important role for cell growth in AGS cells, 
and raises the possibility that inhibition of STAT3 activity is one of 
the mechanisms responsible for the antitumor effect of DIF-1 in these 
cells.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 20, number 2]

 
