Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 20, number 6
March *, 2003

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been 
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other 
useful information is available at DictyBase--http://dictybase.org.

=============
  Abstracts
=============

RacB regulates cytoskeletal function in Dictyostelium 

Eunkyung Lee1+, David J. Seastone2, Ed Harris2 James A. Cardelli2 and 
David A. Knecht1*

1Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut, 
Storrs, CT 06269
2Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Louisiana State University 
Medical Center, 1501 Kings Highway, Shreveport, LA 71130

*to whom correspondence should be addressed
phone-860-486-2200
fax- 860-486-4331 
Email knecht@uconn.edu

Eukaryotic Cell, in press

ABSTRACT

Thus far 14 homologues of mammalian Rac proteins have been identified in 
Dictyostelium. It is unclear whether each of these genes has a unique 
function or to what extent they play redundant roles in actin cytoskeletal 
organization. In order to investigate the specific function of RacB, we 
have conditionally expressed wild type (WT-RacB), dominant negative 
(N17-RacB) and constitutively activated (V12-RacB) versions of the 
protein. Upon induction, cells expressing V12-RacB stopped growing, 
detached from the surface and formed numerous spherical surface 
protrusions, while cells overexpressing WT-RacB became flattened on the 
surface. In contrast, cells overexpressing N17-RacB did not show any 
significant morphological abnormalities. The surface protrusions seen 
in V12-RacB cells appear to be actin driven protrusions because they 
were enriched in F-actin and were inhibitable by cytochalasin A treatment. 
The protrusions in V12-RacB cells did not require myosin II activity, which 
distinguishes them from blebs formed by wild type cells under stress. 
Finally, we examined the functional consequences of expression of wild 
type and mutant RacB. Phagocytosis, endocytosis and fluid phase efflux 
rates were reduced in all cell-lines expressing RacB proteins but the 
greatest decrease was observed for cells expressing V12-RacB. From these 
results, we conclude that like other members of the Rho family, RacB 
induces polymerization of actin, but the consequences of activation 
appears to be different from other Dictyostelium Rac proteins so far 
investigated, resulting in different morphological and functional changes 
in cells. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A STAT regulated, stress-induced signalling pathway in Dictyostelium
(Dictyostelium STAT and the stress response)
Tsuyoshi Araki*, Masatsune Tsujioka*, Tomoaki Abe, Masashi Fukuzawa, Marcel 
Meima, Pauline Schaap, Takahiro Morio+, Hideko Urushihara+, Mariko Katoh+, 
Mineko Maeda^, Yoshimasi Tanaka+, Ikuo Takeuchi@ and Jeffrey G. Williams

School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Wellcome Trust Biocentre
Dow Street, DUNDEE, DD1 5EH, UK

+ Institute of Biological Sciences, University of Tsukuba,Tsukuba, Ibaraki 
305-8572, JAPAN

^Department of Biology, Osaka University, Machikaneyama 1-16, Toyonaka,
Osaka 560-0043 JAPAN

@Novartis Foundation (Japan) for the Promotion of Science, Roppongi, 
Minato-ku, Tokyo 106-0032, JAPAN


*These authors contributed equally to this work
Author for correspondence (e-mail address j.g.williams@dundee.ac.uk)
                                    
J. Cell Science, in press.

SUMMARY

The Dictyostelium stalk cell inducer DIF directs tyrosine phosphorylation 
and nuclear accumulation of the STAT (Signal Transducer and Activator of 
Transcription) protein Dd-STATc. We show that hyper-osmotic stress, heat 
shock and oxidative stress also activate Dd-STATc. Hyper-osmotic stress 
is known to elevate intracellular cGMP and cAMP levels and the membrane 
permeant analogue 8-bromo-cGMP rapidly activates Dd-STATc, while 8-bromo-
cAMP is a much less effective inducer. Surprisingly, however, Dd-STATc 
remains stress activatable in null mutants for components of the known 
cGMP-mediated and cAMP-mediated stress-response pathways and in a double 
mutant affecting both pathways. Also, Dd-STATc null cells are not 
abnormally sensitive to hyper-osmotic stress. Micro-array analysis 
identified two genes, gapA and rtoA, that are induced by hyper-osmotic 
stress. Osmotic stress induction of gapA and rtoA is entirely dependent 
upon Dd-STATc. Neither gene is inducible by DIF but both are rapidly 
inducible with 8-bromo-cGMP. Again, 8-bromo-cAMP is a much less potent 
inducer than 8-bromo-cGMP. These data show that Dd-STATc functions as a 
transcriptional activator in a stress response pathway and the 
pharmacological evidence, at least, is consistent with cGMP acting as 
second messenger.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Synergistic control of cellular adhesion by TM9 proteins 

Mohammed Benghezal, Sophie Cornillon, Leigh Gebbie, Laeticia Alibaud, Franz 
Brckert, Franois Letourneur and Pierre Cosson

Molecular Biology of the Cell (in press)

ABSTRACT

The transmembrane 9 (TM9) family of proteins contains numerous members in 
eukaryotes. Although their function remains essentially unknown in higher 
eukaryotes, the Dictyostelium discoideum Phg1a TM9 protein was recently 
reported to be essential for cellular adhesion and phagocytosis. Here the 
function of Phg1a and of a new divergent member of the TM9 family called 
Phg1b was further investigated in Dictyostelium discoideum. The phenotypes 
of PHG1a, PHG1b and PHG1a/PHG1b double knockout cells revealed that Phg1a 
and Phg1b proteins play a synergistic but not redundant role in cellular 
adhesion, phagocytosis, growth and development. Complementation analysis 
supports a synergistic regulatory function rather than a receptor role for 
Phg1a and Phg1b proteins. Altogether these results suggest that Phg1 
proteins act as regulators of cellular adhesion, possibly by controlling 
the intracellular transport in the endocytic pathway and the composition 
of the cell surface.

submitted by Benghezal@athelas.com

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dictyostelium discoideum transformation by oscillating electric field 
electroporation

Laeticia Alibaud, Pierre Cosson, and Mohammed Benghezal

Biotechniques (in press)

ABSTRACT

Dictyostelium discoideum has been used as a genetically tractable model 
organism to study many biological phenomena. High efficiency transformation 
is a prerequisite for successful genetic screens such as mutant 
complementation, identification of suppressor genes or insertional 
mutagenesis. Although exponential decay electroporation is the standard 
transformation technique for Dictyostelium discoideum, its efficiency is 
relatively low and its reproducibility weak. In this study we optimized 
the oscillating electroporation technique for Dictyostelium discoideum 
transformation and compared it to the exponential decay electroporation. 
A twenty-fold increase of the efficiency was reproducibly achieved. This 
alternative electroporation technique should facilitate future genetic 
approaches in Dictyostelium discoideum.

submitted by Benghezal@athelas.com

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 20, number 6]

 
