Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 16, number 4
February 10, 2001

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page
"http://dicty.cmb.northwestern.edu/dicty"

==============
  Abstracts
==============

WD-repeat domains target Dictyostelium myosin heavy chain kinases 
by binding directly to myosin filaments

Paul A. Steimle*, Teresa Naismith†, Lucila Licate*; and Thomas T. Egelhoff*

*Department of Physiology and Biophysics 
 Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine
 Cleveland, Ohio  44106-4970
†Current address:
  Department of Cell Biology and Physiology
  Washington University 
  St. Louis, MO  63130

Journal of Biological Chemistry (In Press)

Abstract:

Myosin heavy chain kinase A (MHCK A) phosphorylates mapped sites at the
carboxyl-terminal tail of Dictyostelium myosin II heavy chain (MHC), driving
disassembly of myosin filaments both in vitro and in vivo.  MHCK A is
organized into three functional domains that include an amino-terminal
coiled-coil region, a central kinase catalytic domain unrelated to
conventional protein kinases, and a WD-repeat domain at the
carboxy-terminus.  MHCK B is a homologue of MHCK A that possesses
structurally related catalytic and WD-repeat domains. In the current study,
we explored the role of the WD-repeat domains in defining the activities of
both MHCK A and MHCK B using recombinant bacterially-expressed truncations
of these kinases either with or without their WD-repeat domains.  We
demonstrate that substrate targeting is a conserved function of the
WD-repeat domains of both MHCK A and MHCK B and that this targeting is
specific for Dictyostelium myosin II filaments.  We also show that the
mechanism of targeting involves direct binding of the WD-repeat domains to
the myosin substrate.  To our knowledge, this is the first report of
WD-repeat domains physically targeting attached kinase domains to their
substrates.  The examples presented here may serve as a paradigm for enzyme
targeting in other systems. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The complex repeats of Dictyostelium discoideum

Gernot Glöckner1*+, Karol Szafranski1+, Thomas Winckler2, Theodor
Dingermann2, Michael A. Quail3, Edward Cox4, Ludwig Eichinger5, Angelika
Anna Noegel5, André Rosenthal1,6
1 IMB Jena, Dept of Genome Analysis, Beutenbergstr. 11, D-07745 Jena,
Germany
2Institut für Pharmazeutische Biologie, Biozentrum, Marie-Curie-Strasse
9, D-60439 Frankfurt, Germany
3The Sanger Centre, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridgeshire  CB10 1SA, UK
4 Dept. of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton,  NJ
08544, USA
5Institut für Biochemie I, Medizinische Einrichtungen der Universität zu
Köln, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 52, D-50931 Köln, Germany
6 Friedrich Schiller Universität Jena, D-07743 Jena, Germany
* corresponding author
Genome Research, in press

Abstract

In the course of determining the sequence of the Dictyostelium
discoideum genome we have characterised in detail the quantity and
nature of interspersed repetitive elements present in this species.
Several of the most abundant small complex repeats and transposons
(DIRS-1; TRE3-A,B; TRE5-A; skipper; Tdd-4; H3R) have been described
previously. In our analysis we have identified additional elements. Thus
we can now present a complete list of complex repetitive elements in D.
discoideum. All elements add up to 10 % of the genome.  Some of the
newly described elements belong to established classes (TRE3-C, D;
TRE5-B,C; DGLT-A,P; Tdd-5). However, we have also defined two new
classes of DNA transposable elements (DDT; thug) that have not been
described so far. Based on the nucleotide amount we calculated the least
copy number in each family. These vary between less than 10 up to over
200 copies. Unique sequences adjacent to the element ends and truncation
points in elements gave a measure for the fragmentation of the elements.
Furthermore, we describe the diversity of single elements with regard to
polymorphisms and conserved structures. All elements show insertion
preference into loci in which other elements of the same family reside.
The analysis of the complex repeats is a valuable data resource for the
ongoing assembly of whole D. discoideum chromosomes.


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Large Scale Sequencing and Analysis of AT rich Eukaryote Genomes

Gernot Glöckner, Institut für Molekulare Biotechnologie E.V., Department
of Genome Analysis, D-07745 Jena, Germany

Current Genomics (2000), 1, 289-299

Abstract

Environmental pressures can direct genomes from a normal to a more or
less pronounced imbalance in the base composition. These pressures seem
to occur relatively often since genomes with a deviation from a normal
base composition are widespread throughout lower eukaryotes. These
genomes show altered codon usage and enrichment for the preferred bases
in intron and intergenic regions. Techniques designed for large scale
sequencing and assembly of genomes with normal base composition will
fail with these unusual genomes. Additionally, the currently available
analysis tools are mainly suitable for gene finding in genomes with
normal base composition.
In recent years some large scale genome analysis projects involving
species with a skew directed to a very high AT content were initiated.
These projects are encountered with sequencing, assembly, and gap
closure problems due to the high AT content. These problems can only be
overcome with additional techniques, which partly were developed and
used in the ongoing projects. In this review some characteristic aspects
of AT rich genomes, the progress of the Dictyostelium discoideum and the
Plasmodium falciparum projects, as well as techniques specifically used
for the sequencing of these genomes are highlighted.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A role for myosin VII in dynamic cell adhesion

Richard I. Tuxworth, Igor Weber, Deborah Wessels, Gregory C. Addicks, 
David R. Soll, Günther Gerisch, and Margaret A. Titus

Current Biology, in press.


Abstract

Background
The initial stages of phagocytosis and cell motility resemble each other. The 
extension of a pseudopod at the leading edge of a migratory cell and the 
formation of a phagocytic cup are actin-dependent and each rely on the plasma 
membrane adhering to a surface during dynamic extension.  

Results
A myosin VII null mutant exhibited a drastic loss of adhesion to particles, 
consistent with the extent of observed decrease in particle uptake.  
Additionally, cell-cell adhesion and the adhesion of the leading edge to the 
substratum during cell migration were defective in the myosin VII null cells.  
GFP-myosin VII rescues the phagocytosis defect of the null mutant and was 
distributed in the cytosol and recruited to the cortical cytoskeleton, where 
it appeared to be enriched at the tips of filopods.  It was also localized 
to phagocytic cups, but only during the initial stages of particle 
engulfment.  During migration, GFP-myosin VII is found at the leading edge 
of the cell.

Conclusions
Myosin VII plays an important role in mediating the initial binding of 
cells to substrata, a novel role for an unconventional myosin.  

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Genetic analysis of phototaxis in Dictyostelium.
P.R. Fisher

Comprehensive Series in Photosciences Vol. 1. "Photomovement". Chapter 19.
pp. 517-558. Ed. D-P. Häder and M. Lebert. Publisher: Elsevier Science Ltd.
In Press.

Preprint version available from http://www.latrobe.edu.au/www/mcbg/my.html.

Abstract.

Dictyostelium discoideum slugs are doubtless the simplest multicellular
eukaryotes in which classical and molecular genetic approaches to the study
of the signal transduction pathways controlling photomovement are possible.
The slugs are formed by chemotactic aggregation of starving amoebae, so
that it is a simple matter to generate, from clonally-derived mutant cell
lines, hundreds of genetically identical multicellular individuals for
study. Adding to the already extensive knowledge of the unicellular stages
of the D. discoideum life cycle, classical and molecular genetics have
begun to unravel transduction of signals controlling phototaxis (and
thermotaxis) in the slugs. Distributed over all seven genetic linkage
groups are at least 20, but possibly as many as 55 genes of importance for
slug behaviour. The encoded proteins appear from pharmacological studies
and mutant phenotypes to govern transduction pathways involving
extracellular cAMP signals and corresponding receptors, heterotrimeric and
small GTP-binding proteins, the intracellular second messengers cyclic AMP,
cyclic GMP, Ca2+ and IP3 as well as cytoskeletal proteins such as Actin
Binding Protein-120 and myosin II. Pathways from the photo- and
thermoreceptors converge first with each other and thence with those from
extracellular tip activation (cyclic AMP) and inhibition (Slug Turning
Factor and/or ammonia and/or adenosine) signals that control slug movement
and morphogenesis.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The phosphorylated C-terminus of cAR1 plays a role in cell-type-specific 
gene expression and STATa tyrosine phosphorylation

Celia Briscoe, John Moniakis, Ji Yun Kim, Jason M. Brown, Dale Hereld,
Peter N. Devreotes, and Richard A. Firtel

Developmental Biology, in press.

ABSTRACT

        cAMP receptors mediate some signalling pathways via coupled 
heterotrimeric G proteins, while others are G-protein-independent.  This 
latter class includes the activation of the transcription factors GBF and 
STATa.  Within the cellular mounds formed by aggregation, micromolar levels 
of cAMP activate GBF function, thereby inducing the transcription of 
postaggregative genes and initiating multicellular differentiation.  
Activation of STATa, a regulator of culmination and ecmB expression, results 
from cAMP receptor-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation and nuclear localization, 
also in mound-stage cells.  During mound development, the cAMP receptor 
cAR1 is in a low-affinity state and is phosphorylated on multiple serine 
residues in its C-terminus.  This paper addresses possible roles of cAMP 
receptor phosphorylation in the cAMP-mediated stimulation of GBF activity, 
STATa tyrosine phosphorylation, and cell-type-specific gene expression.  
To accomplish this, we have expressed cAR1 mutants in a strain in which 
the endogenous cAMP receptors that mediate postaggregative gene expression 
in vivo are deleted.  We then examined the ability of these cells to undergo 
morphogenesis, induce postaggregative and cell-type-specific gene expression, 
and STATa tyrosine phosphorylation.  Analysis of cAR1 mutants in which the 
C-terminal tail is deleted or the ligand-mediated phosphorylation sites are 
mutated suggests that the cAR1 C-terminus is not essential for GBF-mediated 
postaggregative gene expression or STATa tyrosine phosphorylation, but may 
play a role in regulating cell-type-specific gene expression and 
morphogenesis.  A mutant receptor, in which the C-terminal tail is 
constitutively phosphorylated, exhibits constitutive activation of STATa 
tyrosine phosphorylation in pulsed cells in suspension and a significantly 
impaired ability to induce cell-type-specific gene expression.  The 
constitutively phosphorylated receptor also exerts a partial dominant 
negative effect on multicellular development when expressed in wild-type 
cells. These findings suggest that the phosphorylated C-terminus of cAR1 
may be involved in regulating aspects of receptor-mediated processes, is 
not essential for GBF function, and may play a role in mediating subsequent 
development.


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

[End Dicty News, volume 16, number 4]
