Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 16, number 9
May 5, 2001

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at DictyBase--http://dictybase.org.

==============
  Abstracts
==============

Involvement of a triton-insoluble floating fraction in dictyostelium 
cell-cell adhesion.

Harris TJ, Awrey DE, Cox BJ, Ravandi A, Tsang A, Siu CH.

Banting and Best Department of Medical Research, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L6.

J Biol Chem 2001 Mar 16; [epub ahead of print]

We have isolated and characterized a Triton-insoluble floating fraction 
(TIFF) from Dictyostelium.  Ten major proteins were consistently detected 
in TIFF and six species were identified by mass spectrometry as actin, 
porin, comitin, regulatory myosin light chain, a novel member of the 
CD36 family, and the phospholipid-anchored cell adhesion molecule gp80.  
TIFF was enriched with many acylated proteins.  Also, the sterol:
phospholipid ratio of TIFF was 10-fold higher than that of the bulk 
plasma membrane.  Immunoelectron microscopy showed that TIFF has vesicular 
morphology and confirmed the association of gp80 and comitin with TIFF 
membranes.  Several TIFF properties were similar to those of Dictyostelium 
contact regions, which were isolated as a cytoskeleton-associated membrane 
fraction.  Mass spectrometry demonstrated that TIFF and contact regions 
shared the same major proteins.  During development, gp80 colocalized with 
F-actin, porin and comitin at cell-cell contacts.  These proteins were 
also recruited to gp80 caps induced by antibody crosslinking.  Filipin 
staining revealed high sterol levels in both gp80-enriched cell-cell 
contacts and gp80 caps.  Moreover, sterol sequestration by filipin and 
digitonin inhibited gp80-mediated cell-cell adhesion.  This study reveals 
that  Dictyostelium TIFF has structural properties previously attributed 
to vertebrate TIFF and establishes a role for Dictyostelium TIFF in cell-
cell adhesion during multicellular development.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The MADS-box gene srfA is expressed in a complex pattern under the control
of alternative promoters and is essential for different aspects of
Dictyostelium development


Ricardo Escalante*, Juan J. Vicente, Nicolás Moreno and Leandro Sastre

Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas C.S.I.C/U.A.M. C/Arturo Duperier,
4, 28029 Madrid, Spain.
*Author for correspondence: Fax: +34-91-585-4587. e-mail: rescalante@iib.uam.es

Developmental Biology (in press)

ABSTRACT

srfA displays a complex temporal and cell-type specific pattern of
expression in Dictyostelium and is expressed by most of its cell types at
some stage of their development. This complexity is achieved by the use of
alternative promoters. The promoter activity of the proximal region was
found to be restricted to a subset of prestalk cells. Little or no
associated expression was observed in the lower cup and basal disc during
culmination. The middle promoter region was preferentially active in
prestalk cells under usual conditions of filter development. Interestingly,
during slug migration, the activity of this promoter in posterior prespore
cells was strongly induced. The distal region displayed a dual pattern of
expression. Thus, before culmination, this region drove lacZ expression in
a few cells scattered along the entire structure. However, intense lacZ
staining was found in the spores by the end of culmination. We have
previously reported that srfA expression is essential for spore
differentiation (Escalante and Sastre, 1998. Development 125, 3801-3808).
Our novel finding of the expression of the gene in prestalk cells before
culmination suggested that it might play additional roles in Dictyostelium
development. The study of knock out strains revealed that srfA is also
required for proper slug migration. Spore differentiation and slug
migration defects were rescued by re-expression of srfA in the null mutant
background, under the appropriate promoter control. The expression of srfA
under the activity of the distal promoter region was able to rescue spore
differentiation but not slug migration. Conversely, re-expression under the
control of the middle promoter rescued slug morphogenesis and migration.
Our results demonstrate that the correct spatial and temporal pattern of
expression of srfA is essential for the different functions that this
transcription factor plays in development.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The WASp-like Protein Scar Regulates Macropinocytosis, Phagocytosis and 
Endosomal Membrane Flow in Dictyostelium.

David J. Seastone1, Ed Harris1, Lesly A. Temesvari2, James E. Bear 3,4, 
Charles L. Saxe 3, and James Cardelli 1,2,,*

1Department of Microbiology and Immunology and 2 The Feist-Weiller Cancer 
Center
Louisiana State University Medical Center
Shreveport, LA  71130

3 Department of Cell Biology
Emory University School of Medicine
Atlanta, GA 30322-3030

4Present address: Department of Biology
Mass. Inst. Of Tech.
Cambridge, MA

Journal of Cell Science, in press

Abstract

Scar, a member of the WASp protein family, was discovered in D.  discoideum 
during a genetic screen for second-site mutations that suppressed a 
developmental defect. Disruption of the scar gene led to a two-fold decrease 
in the levels of cellular F-actin. To investigate the role of Scar in 
endocytosis, phagocytosis, and endocytic membrane trafficking, processes 
that depend on actin polymerization, we have analyzed a Dictyostelium 
cell-line that is genetically null for Scar.  Rates of fluid phase 
macropinocytosis, and phagocytosis are significantly reduced in the scar - 
cell-line. In addition, exocytosis of fluid phase is delayed in these cells, 
and movement of fluid phase from lysosomes to post-lysosomes is also 
delayed. Inhibition of actin polymerization with cytochalasin A resulted 
in similar phenotypes, suggesting that Scar-mediated polymerization of the 
actin cytoskeleton was important in the regulation of these processes. 
Supporting this conclusion, fluorescence microscopy revealed that some 
endo-lysosomes were ringed with F-actin in control cells but no F-actin 
was detected associated with endo-lysosomes in Scar null cells. Disruption 
of the two genes encoding the actin monomer sequestering protein profilin 
in wild-type cells causes defects in the rate of pinocytosis and fluid 
phase efflux. Consistent with a predicted physical interaction between 
Scar and profilin, disrupting the scar gene in the profilin null background 
results in greater decreases in the rate of fluid phase internalization and 
fluid phase release compared to either mutant alone. Taken together, these 
data support a model in which Scar and profilin functionally interact to 
regulate internalization of fluid and particles and later steps in the 
endosomal pathway, probably through regulation of actin cytoskeleton 
polymerization. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Rab7 Regulates Phagosome Maturation in Dictyostelium

Adam Rupper1, Bryon Grove2 and James Cardelli1*

Department of Microbiology and Immunology and
The Feist/Weiller Cancer Center
LSUHSC
Shreveport, LA 71130

2Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology
University of North Dakota
 Grand Forks, North Dakota 58202

*Corresponding Author
318-675-5756
jcarde@lsuhsc.edu

Journal of Cell Science, in press

Abstract

     A Dictyostelium Rab7 homolog has been demonstrated to regulate fluid-phase 
influx, efflux, retention of lysosomal hydrolases and phagocytosis.  Since Rab7 
function appeared to be required for efficient phagocytosis, we sought to 
further characterize the role of Rab7 in phagosomal maturation.  Expression of 
GFP-Rab7 resulted in labeling of both early and late phagosomes containing 
yeast, but not forming phagocytic cups. In order to determine if Rab7 played 
a role in regulating membrane traffic between the endo/lysosomal system and 
maturing phagosomes, latex bead containing (LBC) phagosomes were purified 
from wild-type cells at various times after internalization. Glycosidases, 
cysteine proteinases, Rab7 and lysosomally associated membrane proteins were 
delivered rapidly to nascent phagosomes in control cells.  LBC phagosomes 
isolated from cells over-expressing dominant negative (DN) Rab7 contained 
very low levels of LmpA (lysosomal integral membrane protein) and 
a-mannosidase was not detectable.  Interestingly, cysteine proteinases 
were delivered to phagosomes as apparent pro-forms in cells over-expressing 
DN Rab7.    Despite these defects, phagosomes in cells over-expressing DN 
Rab7 matured to form multi-particle spacious phagosomes, except these 
phagosomes remained significantly more acidic than control phagosomes.  
These results suggested that Rab7 regulates both an early and late step 
of phagosomal maturation, similar to its role in the endo/lysosomal system.    

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Phagocytosis and Macropinocytosis in Dictyostelium:  Phosphoinositide-Based 
Processes, Biochemically Distinct

James Cardelli

Department of Microbiology and Immunology
Feist-Weiller Cancer Center
LSU Health Sciences Center
Shreveport, LA 71130

Telephone: 318-675-5756
E-mail: jcarde@lsuhsc.edu

Traffic, Review in Press

Abstract

     Phagocytosis and macropinocytosis are actin-dependent clathrin-independent 
processes primarily performed by cells like neutrophils and macrophages that 
result in the internalization of particles or the formation of fluid-filled 
macropinosomes > 0.5 mM in diameter, respectively.  Both of these processes 
can result in the destruction of internalized microbes, and the display of 
microbial antigens at the cell surface to activate T and B cells; therefore, 
these internalization events play critical roles in the host response to 
invasion by microbial pathogens. Phagocytosis consists of a number of stages, 
including attachment of particles to to cell surface receptors, engulfment 
of the particle dependent on actin polymerization and membrane exocytosis, 
and formation of phago-lysosomes. In contrast, the molecular steps 
regulating macropinocytosis are only just now being deciphered.  Much 
remains to be learned concerning the signaling pathways that regulate 
these processes. Dictyostelium is a genetically and biochemically tractable 
professional phagocyte that has proven to be a powerful system in which to 
determine the nature of the molecular steps involved in regulating these 
internalization processes.  This review primarily summarizes what is 
currently understood concerning the molecular mechanisms that regulate 
the process of phagocytosis and macropinocytosis in Dictyostelium. Recent 
data will also be presented that suggests that although phosphatidylinositol 
4,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns(4,5)P2) metabolism regulates both phagocytosis and 
macropinocytosis (a process morphologically similar to phagocytosis), the 
molecular components and signaling pathways regulating each pathway differ.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

[End Dicty News, volume 16, number 9]
