Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 16, number 6
March, 24, 2001

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at DictyBase--http://dictybase.org.

======================
  Post-doc available
======================

A postdoctoral position is available at Cornell University to work on a
NSF sponsored project on signal transduction networks of eukaryotic cell
chemotaxis.  We aim at characterizing the signalling pathways involved
in chemotaxis towards cAMP in Dictyostelium discoideum by visualising
GFP-fused-proteins under very controlled stimuli. This project is a
collaboration between the Physics Dept. at Cornell University (with the
support of the Nanobiotechnology Center,  <www.nbtc.cornell.edu>) and
the Biology Dept. and Physics Dept. at the University of California in
San Diego. The nature of the team involved offers a unique opportunity
to conduct research in an interdisciplinary environment with researchers
from biology, and experimental and theoretical physics. Applications
from cell biologists and physicists are welcome. Applications including
a curriculum vitae and a publication list should be send to the address
below. In addition, applicants should arrange to have two letters of
reference send to the same address. E-mail applications are welcome.
Cornell University is an Affirmative Action, Equal Opportunity Employer.
Please apply to Prof. Eberhard Bodenschatz, Cornell University, LASSP,
618 Clark Hall of Science, Ithaca, NY 14853 (eb22@cornell.edu).


==============
  Abstracts
==============

The Dictyostelium Bcr/Abr-Related Protein DRG regulates both Rac- and
Rab-dependent pathways

Menno L.W. Knetsch, Nicole Schäfers, Heinz Horstmann, and Dietmar J.
Manstein

Dept. of Biophysics, Max-Planck-Institute for Medical Research, 69120
Heidelberg, Germany

EMBO J. in press

Abstract

Dictyostelium discoideum DdRacGap1 (DRG) contains both Rho-GEF and Rho-GAP
domains, a feature it shares with mammalian Bcr and Abr. To elucidate the
physiological role of this multifunctional protein, we characterised the
enzymatic activity of recombinant DRG fragments in vitro, created DRG-null
cells, and studied the function of the protein in vivo by analysing the
phenotypic changes displayed by DRG-depleted cells and DRG-null cells
complemented with DRG or DRG fragments. Our results show that DRG-GEF
modulates F-actin dynamics and cAMP-induced F-actin formation via
Rac1-dependent signalling pathways. DRG's RacE-GAP activity is required for
proper cytokinesis to occur. Additionally, we provide evidence that the
specificity of DRG is not limited to members of the Rho family of small
GTPases. A recombinant DRG-GAP accelerates the GTP-hydrolysis of RabD
30-fold in vitro and our complementation studies show that DRG-GAP activity
is required for the RabD-dependent regulation of the contractile vacuole
system in Dictyostelium.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

ADENYLYL CYCLASE A EXPRESSION IS TIP-SPECIFIC IN DICTYOSTELIUM SLUGS AND 
DIRECTS STATA NUCLEAR TRANSLOCATION AND CUDA GENE EXPRESSION

Irene Verkerke-van Wijk2, Masashi Fukuzawa1, Peter N. Devreotes3 
and Pauline Schaap1*

1School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, U.K.
2Department of Biology, University of Leiden, The Netherlands
3Department of Biological Chemistry, The Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, USA

Developmental Biology, in press.

cAMP oscillations, generated by adenylyl cyclase A (ACA), coordinate 
cell aggregation in Dictyostelium and have also been implicated in 
organiser function during multicellular development. We used a gene fusion 
of the ACA promoter with a labile lacZ derivative to study the expression 
pattern of ACA. During aggregation, most cells expressed ACA, but 
thereafter expression was lost in all cells except those of the anterior tip. 
Before aggregation, ACA transcription was strongly upregulated by 
nanomolar cAMP pulses. Postaggregative transcription was sustained by 
nanomolar cAMP pulses, but downregulated by a continuous micromolar 
cAMP stimulus and by the stalk-cell-inducing factor, DIF. Earlier work 
showed that the transcription factor StatA displays tip-specific nuclear 
translocation and directs tip-specific expression of the nuclear protein 
CudA, that is essential for culmination. Both StatA and CudA were present 
in nuclei throughout the entire slug in an aca null mutant that expresses ACA 
from the constitutive actin15 promoter. This suggests that the tip-specific 
expression of ACA directs tip-specific nuclear translocation of StatA and 
tip-specific expression of CudA.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Recruitment of a Myosin Heavy Chain Kinase to Actin-Rich Protrusions in
Dictyostelium

Authors: Paul A. Steimle*, Shigehiko Yumura†, Graham P. Côté‡, Quint G.
Medley**, Mark V. Polyakov *, Brian Leppert*, Thomas T. Egelhoff*

*Department of Physiology and Biophysics
 Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine
 Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4970

†Department of Biology
 Yamaguchi University
 Yamaguchi, Japan 753-8512

‡Department of Biochemistry
 Queens University
 Kingston, Ontario, Canada K7L-3N6

Current Biology, In Press

ABSTRACT:

Nonmuscle myosin II plays fundamental roles in cell body translocation
during migration and is typically depleted or absent from actin-based cell
protrusions such as lamellipodia, but the mechanisms preventing myosin II
assembly in such structures have not been identified [1-3]. In Dictyostelium
discoideum, myosin II filament assembly is controlled primarily through
myosin heavy chain (MHC) phosphorylation. The phosphorylation of sites in
the myosin tail domain by myosin heavy chain kinase A (MHCK A) drives
disassembly of myosin II filaments in vitro and in vivo [4]. To better
understand the cellular regulation of MHCK A activity, and thus the
regulation of myosin II filament assembly, we studied the in vivo
localization of native and green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged MHCK A.
MHCK A redistributes from the cytosol to the cell cortex in response to
stimulation of Dictyostelium cells with chemoattractant in an F-actin
dependent manner. During chemotaxis, random migration, and
phagocytic/endocytic events, MHCK A is recruited preferentially to
actin-rich leading edge extensions. Given the ability of MHCK A to
disassemble myosin II filaments, this localization may represent a
fundamental mechanism for disassembling myosin II filaments and preventing
localized filament assembly at sites of actin-based protrusion.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Myosin II-dependent cylindrical protrusions induced by quinine in
Dictyostelium - antagonizing effects of actin polymerization at the leading
edge

Kunito Yoshida and Kei Inouye

Department of Botany, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

J. Cell Sci. in press

Summary

We found that amoeboid cells of Dictyostelium are induced by a millimolar
concentration of quinine to form a rapidly elongating, cylindrical
protrusion, which often led to sustained locomotion of the cells. Formation
of the protrusion was initiated by fusion of a contractile vacuole with the
cell membrane. During protrusion extension, a patch of the contractile
vacuole membrane stayed undiffused on the leading edge of the protrusion for
over 30 seconds. Protrusion formation was not inhibited by high osmolarity
of the external medium (at least up to 400 mosM). On the other hand, mutant
cells lacking myosin II (mhc- cells) failed to extend protrusions upon
exposure to quinine. When GFP-myosin-expressing cells were exposed to
quinine, GFP-myosin was accumulated in the cell periphery forming a layer
under the cell membrane, but a newly formed protrusion was initially devoid
of a GFP-myosin layer, which gradually formed and extended from the base of
the protrusion. F-actin was absent in the leading front of the protrusion
during the period of its rapid elongation, and the formation of a layer of
F-actin in the front was closely correlated with its slowing-down or
retraction. Periodical or continuous detachment of the F-actin layer from
the apical membrane of the protrusion, accompanied by a transient increase
in the elongation speed at the site of detachment, was observed in some of
the protrusions. The detached F-actin layers, which formed a spiral layer of
F-actin in the case of continuous detachment, moved in the opposite
direction of protrusion elongation. In the presence of both cytochalasin A
and quinine, the protrusions formed were not cylindrical but spherical,
which swallowed up the entire cellular contents. The estimated bulk flux
into the expanding spherical protrusions of such cells was four-times higher
than the flux into the elongating cylindrical protrusions of the cells
treated with quinine alone.  These results indicate that the force
responsible for the quinine-induced protrusion is mainly due to contraction
of the cell body, which requires normal myosin II functions, while actin
polymerization is important in restricting the direction of its expansion.
We will discuss about the possible significance of tail contraction in cell
movement in the multicellular phase of Dictyostelium development where cell
locomotion similar to that induced by quinine is often observed without
quinine treatment, and in protrusion elongation in general.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Control of cell polarity and chemotaxis by Akt/PKB and PI3 kinase through 
the regulation of PAKa

Chang Y. Chung, Gary Potikyan, and Richard A. Firtel

Molecular Cell, in press.

We demonstrate that PI3 kinase and protein kinase B (PKB or Akt) control 
cell polarity and chemotaxis, in part, through the regulation of PAKa, which 
is required for myosin II assembly.  We demonstrate that PI3K and PKB mediate 
PAKa's subcellular localization, PAKa's activation in response to 
chemoattractant stimulation, and chemoattractant-mediated myosin II 
assembly.  Mutation of the PKB phosphorylation site in PAKa to Ala blocks 
PAKa's activation and inhibits PAKa redistribution in response to 
chemoattractant stimulation, whereas an Asp substitution leads to an activated 
protein.  Addition of the PI3K inhibitor LY294002 results in a rapid loss 
of cell polarity and the axial distribution of actin, myosin, and PAKa.  
These results provide a mechanism by which PI3K regulates chemotaxis.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

[End Dicty News, volume 16, number 6]
