Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 16, number 1
January 20, 2001

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page
"http://dicty.cmb.northwestern.edu/dicty"

==============
  Abstracts
==============

The Dictyostelium discoideum family of Rho-related proteins

Francisco Rivero(1), Heidrun Dislich(1), Gernot Glöckner(2) and Angelika A.
Noegel(1)

(1) Institut für Biochemie I, Medizinische Fakultät, Universität zu Köln.
Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 52, D-50931 Köln, Germany

(2) Institut für Molekulare Biotechnologie, Beutenbergstrasse 11, D-07745
Jena, Germany

Nucleic Acids Research, accepted

ABSTRACT

Taking advantage of the ongoing genome sequencing project, we have
assembled more than 73 kb genomic DNA in 15 contigs harboring 15 genes and
one pseudogene of Rho-related proteins. Comparison with EST sequences
revealed that every gene is interrupted by at least one and up to four
introns. For racC extensive alternative splicing was identified. Northern
blot analysis showed that mRNAs for racA, racE, racG, racH and racI were
present at all stages of development, whereas racJ and racL were expressed
only at late stages. Amino acid sequences have been analyzed in the context
of Rho-related proteins of other organisms. Rac1a/1b/1c, RacF1/F2 and to a
lesser extent RacB and the GTPase domain of RacA can be grouped in the Rac
subfamily. None of the additional Dictyostelium Rho-related proteins
belongs to any of the well-defined subfamilies, like Rac, Cdc42 or Rho.
RacD and RacA are unique in that they lack the prenylation motif
characteristic of Rho proteins. RacD possesses a 50 residues C-terminal
extension and RacA a 400 residues C-terminal extension that contains a
proline-rich region, two BTB domains and a novel C-terminal domain. We have
also identified homologues for RacA in Drosophila and mammals, thus
defining a new subfamily of Rho proteins, RhoBTB.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Inducible nuclear translocation of a STAT protein in Dictyostelium prespore 
cells: implications for morphogenesis and cell-type regulation

Dirk Dormann*, Tomoaki Abe*, Cornelis J Weijer and Jeffrey Williams 
School of Life Sciences
University of Dundee
Wellcome Trust Biocentre
Dow Street
DUNDEE, DD1 5EH
UK

* These two authors contributed equally to this work

Development, in press.

SUMMARY

Dd-STATa, the Dictyostelium STAT (Signal Transducer and Activator of 
Transcription) protein, is selectively localised in the nuclei of a small 
subset of prestalk cells located in the slug tip. Injection of cAMP into the 
extracellular spaces in the rear of the slug induces rapid nuclear 
translocation of a Dd-GFP:STATa fusion protein in prespore cells surrounding 
the site of injection. This suggests that cAMP signals emanating from the 
tip direct the localised nuclear accumulation of Dd-STATa. It also shows 
that prespore cells are competent to respond to cAMP, by Dd-STATa activation, 
and it implies that cAMP signalling is in some way limiting in the rear of 
the slug. Co-injection of a specific inhibitor of the cAR1 serpentine cAMP 
receptor almost completely prevents the cAMP-induced nuclear translocation, 
showing that most or all of the cAMP signal is transduced by cAR1. 
Dd-GFP:STATa also rapidly translocates into the nuclei of cells adjoining 
the front and back cut edges when a slug is bissected. Less severe 
mechanical disturbances, such as pricking the rear of a slug with an unfilled 
micro-pipette, also cause a more limited nuclear translocation of 
Dd-GFP:STATa. We propose that these signalling events form part of a repair 
mechanism that is activated when the migrating slug suffers mechanical damage.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Expression of activated Ras during Dictyostelium development alters cell
localization and changes cell fate

Zahara M. Jaffer1, Meenal Khosla1, George B. Spiegelman1,2, and Gerald Weeks1,2

Departments of Microbiology and Immunology1,
and Medical Genetics2, University of British Columbia,
300 - 6174 University Boulevard
Vancouver, B.C., V6T 1Z3, Canada
e-mail:  gweeks@interchange.ubc.ca

Development, in press.

 ABSTRACT

	There is now a body of evidence to indicate that Ras proteins play
important roles in development.  Dictyostelium expresses several ras genes
and each appears to perform a distinct function.  Previous data had
indicated that the over-expression of an activated form of the major
developmentally regulated gene, rasD, caused a major aberration in
morphogenesis and cell type determination.  We now show that the
developmental expression of an activated rasG gene under the control of the
rasD promoter causes a similar defect.  In order to determine if the
defects were due to the presence of activated RasG in prestalk or prespore
cells, rasG was expressed under the control of either the ecmAO or the psA
promoters.  When activated rasG was specifically expressed in prestalk
cells in ecmAO::rasG(G12T) transformants, a single tipped aggregate was
formed and cell type specific gene expression was not appreciably altered.
In contrast, when activated rasG was specifically expressed in prespore
cells in psA::rasG(G12T) transformants, multi-tipped aggregates were formed
and the expression of the prespore specific gene cotC was dramatically
reduced while the expression of the prestalk cell specific gene ecmA gene
was markedly enhanced.  Thus, it is the expression of activated ras in
prespore cells that causes the deregulation of cell type specific gene
expression and tip formation.  However, the psA::rasG(G12T) transformants
continued to develop beyond the multi-tipped aggregate stage, suggesting
that the block in development at the multi-tipped aggregate stage in the
rasD::rasG(G12T) transformant is due to the presence of RasG(G12T) in the
prestalk cell population.
The psA::rasG(G12T) transformants produced mounds that supported multiple
stalk like structures, some with small apical sori.  Spore formation was
inhibited and this was not corrected by the presence of wild type cells in
chimeric mixtures, indicating that the defect in spore formation was cell
autonomous.  Prespore cells were initially formed in the mound but they
then transdifferentiated into prestalk cells, which eventually formed stalk
cells.
The single tipped aggregates of the ecmAO::rasG(G12T) transformants
produced slugs that appeared normal, but these went on to form abnormal
terminal structures with very few spores and large numbers of stalk cells.
Although the slugs appeared to be normal, there was considerable prestalk
cell mislocalization.  PstA cells were found in the rear rather than at the
tip and PstO cells were greatly reduced in number and also found in the
rear.  In addition, there was an increase in the number of PstB cells in
both the anterior and posterior regions of the slug, but the anterior PstB
cells were not specifically localized as a cone behind the tip.  The slugs
also exhibited impaired motility and phototaxis and there was no formation
of stalk tubes at the onset of culmination.  The defect in spore formation
was corrected by developing the transformant in chimeric mixtures with wild
type cells, indicating that the defect is not cell autonomous.  Examination
of cell localization in chimeras revealed that wild type cells occupied the
anterior tip of the slug, presumably providing the signals that allowed the
prespore cells of the transformant to form spores.
These results indicate that the expression of activated rasG in prespore
cells results in their transdifferentiation into prestalk cells, whereas
activated rasG expression in prestalk causes gross mislocalization of the
prestalk cell populations.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

[End Dicty News, volume 16, number 1]
