Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 16, number 8
April 21, 2001

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at DictyBase--http://dictybase.org.

================================
  News from the Genome Project
================================

PRELIMINARY DIRECTORY OF DICTYOSTELIUM GENES

WEB SITE:  http://dicty.sdsc.edu/annotationdicty.html

Negin Iranfar, Rolf Olsen and William F. Loomis
University of California San Diego
La Jolla Cal. 92093
and
The Dictyostelium Genome Project*

We have prepared a Preliminary Directory of Dictyostelium Genes present in
the contigs generated at the Sanger Centre by using a trained version of
the genefinder program HMMgene (Krogh, 2000). The Preliminary Directory can
accessed at  http://dicty.sdsc.edu/annotationdicty.html.
The list of 6,700 genes can be downloaded as an Excel file for sorting and
searching. Rapid links are provided to the sequences of specific genes and
the complete set can be searched by Blast programs. Using a challenge set
of 20 genes we find that HMMgene trained on Dictyostelium genes is
significantly more effective (98.9% of codons) than TIGR's GlimmerM trained
with malarial genes (87.5% of codons).

Krogh, A. (2000). Using database matches with HMMGene for automated gene
detection in Drosophila. Genome Res. 10: 523-528.

*The Dictyostelium Genome Project : The Baylor Sequencing Center, Houston,
Texas, (A. Kuspa and R. Gibbs) where sequencing is supported by the NIH;
the Institute of Biochemistry, Cologne together with the Institute of
Molecular Biotechnology, Jena, Germany (G. Glöckner , A. Rosenthal, L.
Eichinger and A. Noegel) where sequencing is supported by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (No 113/10-1 and 10-2).;  and the EUDICT consortium
supported by The European Union (M-A. Rajandream, D. Lawson and B.
Barrell).



==============
  Abstracts
==============

RasG regulates discoidin gene expression during Dictyostelium growth

D.M. Secko1, M. Khosla1, P. Gaudet3,4, A. Tsang3,4,5, G.B. Spiegelman1,2
and G. Weeks1,2*

Department of Microbiology and Immunology1 and Department of Medical
Genetics2, University of British Columbia, 6174 University Blvd.,
Vancouver, British Columbia, V6T 1Z3, Canada

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry3, Centre of Structural and
Functional Genomics4, Department of Biology5, Concordia University, 1455 de
Maisonneuve Blvd. W. Montreal, Quebec, H3G 1M8, Canada

* To whom correspondence and reprint requests should be addressed. Fax:
(604) 822-6041. Email: gweeks@unixg.ubc.ca.

Exp. Cell Research, in press


ABSTRACT

When a pVEII-rasG(G12T) transformant was grown in HL5 media containing no
folate, discoidin and RasG levels increased and then rapidly declined while
cells were in the early stages of exponential growth, a result that
contrasted with the much slower decline of discoidin during the growth of
Ax-2.  The levels of discoidin in Ax-2 were considerably higher than the
levels in the pVEII-rasG(G12T) transformant.  These results suggested the
possibility that RasG(G12T) represses discoidin gene expression.  When the
rasG(G12T) gene was placed under the control the ribonucleotide reductase
(rnrB) promoter, RasG(G12T) was rapidly generated upon exposure to 10 mM
methyl methanesulfonate (MMS) and this was accompanied by an equally rapid
decrease in discoidin mRNA levels, independently confirming that RasG(G12T)
represses discoidin gene expression.  Despite the repression of discoidin
expression by activated RasG, rasG null cells contained decreased levels of
discoidin, indicating that endogenous RasG is essential for optimum
discoidin expression.  These results reveal a role for RasG in regulating
discoidin gene expression and add a further level of complexity to the
regulation of the discoidin promoter.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Functional and regulatory analysis of the Dictyostelium G-box binding factor

Jason M. Brown and Richard A. Firtel

Developmental Biology, in press.

ABSTRACT

The Dictyostelium discoidium G-box Binding Factor (GBF) is required for 
the induction of known postaggregative and cell-type-specific genes.  gbf 
null cells undergo developmental arrest at the loose-mound stage due to 
the absence of GBF-targeted gene transcription.  GBF-mediated gene 
expression is activated by stimulation of cell-surface, seven-span 
cAMP receptors, but this activation is independent of heterotrimeric 
G-proteins.  To further characterize GBF, we assayed a series of GBF 
mutants for their ability to bind a G-box in vitro and to complement 
the gbf null phenotype.  In vitro DNA-binding activity resides in the 
central portion of the protein, which contains two predicted zinc fingers.  
However, in vivo GBF function requires only one intact zinc finger.  
In addition, expression of some GBF mutants results in a partial 
complementation phenotype, suggesting that these mutants are hypomorphic 
alleles.  We used a 2.4 kb GBF-promoter fragment to examine the regulation 
of GBF expression.  GBF promoter-reporter studies confirmed the previous 
finding that GBF transcription is induced by continuous, micromolar 
extracellular cAMP.  We also show that, like the activation of GBF-regulated 
transcription, the induction of GBF expression requires cell-surface cAMP 
receptors, but not heterotrimeric G-proteins.  Finally, reporter studies 
demonstrated that induction of GBF-promoter-regulated expression does not 
require the presence of GBF protein, indicating that GBF expression is not 
regulated by a positive autoregulatory loop.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

FebA: a gene for eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E-binding 
protein (4E-BP) in Dictyostelium discoideum

Takahiro Morio (1) , Hiroo Yasukawa (2), Hideko Urushihara (1), Tamao Saito 
(3), Hiroshi Ochiai (3), Ikuo Takeuchi (4), Mineko Maeda (5) and Yoshimasa 
Tanaka (1)

(1) Institute of Biological Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, 
Ibaraki 305-8572, Japan. (2) Molecular Biology Group, Faculty of 
Engineering, Toyama University, Toyama 930-8555, Japan. (3) Division of 
Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Hokkaido University, 
Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-0810, Japan. (4) Novartis Foundation for the 
Promotion of Science, Takarazuka, Hyogo 665-0042, Japan. (5) Department of 
Biology, Graduate School of Science, Osaka University,  Toyonaka, Osaka 
560-0043, Japan.
 
BBA, in press.

Summary

We have identified a gene encoding a eukaryotic initiation factor 
4E-binding protein (4E-BP) in the EST database of the Dictyostelium cDNA 
project.   The Dictyostelium 4E-BP, designated febA (four e-binding), 
showed significant similarity to mammalian 4E-BPs. Northern blot analysis 
revealed that febA was expressed at a high level in the vegetative growth 
phase but the level of expression decreased during late development.   The 
gene was shown to be non-essential since disruption of the gene had no 
severe effect; the null mutant proliferated normally and formed normal 
fruiting bodies.   However, strains overexpressing the gene could not be 
established, suggesting that an excess of FebA protein may have a lethal 
effect on the cells.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Total tetra knockout of GP138 multigene family implicated in cell
interactions in Dictyostelium discoideum

Key words: sexual cell fusion, multigene, gene disruption

Toshihiro Hata, Mina Takahashi, Yoshimasa Tanaka, and Hideko Urushihara *

Institute of Biological Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba-shi,
305-8572 Japan

* Address correspondence to: Hideko Urushihara,
Institute of Biological Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba-shi, 305-8572 Japan

Gene, in press.

ABSTRACT

The cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum reproduces sexually under
submerged and dark conditions. A cell surface glycoprotein gp138 has been
identified as a target molecule for cell fusion-blocking antibodies, and is
considered to be indispensable for the sexual cell fusion in this organism.
Currently, four isoforms of gp138, DdFRP1a, DdFRP1b, DdFRP2, and DdFRP3, are
known. Genes encoding the latter three isoforms, GP138C, GP138A, and GP138B,
have been isolated, comprising a GP138 multigene family. Here we isolated
the fourth GP138 gene, GP138D, encoding DdFRP1a. These GP138 genes were
found to cluster in a tandem array on chromosome 5, being bordered by two
GP138-like sequences highly homologous to them but truncated. To clarify
functional relationships among the GP138 family members, the entire GP138
region was deleted by a single knockout. Northern hybridization and western
immuno-blotting analyses confirmed complete losses of GP138 mRNA and DdFRPs
in the knockout strains, indicating that there are no more GP138 genes.
Unexpectedly, however, the GP138-null mutants were fully potent for both
sexual cell fusion and subsequent development. In addition, the original
fusion-blocking antibodies detected a cell surface protein of close
electrophoretic mobility to gp138 in the knockouts, suggesting the
possibility that the actual target molecule of the fusion-blocking
antibodies was not DdFRPs but this unidentified component. Since GP138-null
mutants exhibited no obvious defects either in growth or asexual
development, the real function of the GP138 family is unknown. Nevertheless,
the expression levels of other developmental genes such as acaA, csaA,
cotA-C, and spiA appeared to be altered in the GP138-null mutants.
Therefore, it seems to have a non-critical but some role(s) during asexual
development.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

cAMP receptor affinity controls wave dynamics, geometry and 
morphogenesis in Dictyostelium

Dirk Dormann, Ji-Yun Kim, Peter N Devreotes and Cornelis J.Weijer

Journal of Cell Science (2001), in press

Serpentine, G protein coupled, cAMP receptors are key 
components in the detection and relay of the extracellular cAMP 
waves that control chemotactic cell movement during Dictyostelium 
development. During development the cells sequentially express four 
closely related cAMP receptors of decreasing affinity. In this study 
we investigate the effect of cAMP receptor type and affinity on the 
dynamics of cell-cell signalling in-vivo, by measuring the dynamics 
of wave initiation and propagation in a variety of cAMP receptor 
mutants. We find that receptor affinity controls the frequency of 
wave initiation, while it does not determine wave propagation 
velocity, thus resulting in dramatic changes in wave geometry. In the 
limiting case the affinity of the receptor is so low that waves can still 
be initiated but no stable centres form and as a result the cells 
cannot aggregate. In mounds expression of low affinity receptors 
results in very slow concentric waves instead of the normally 
observed multi-armed spiral waves. Under these conditions there is 
no rotational cell movement and the hemispherical mounds cannot 
transform into slugs. These results highlight the importance of 
receptor number and affinity in the proper control of cell-cell 
signalling dynamics required for the successful completion of 
development.


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

[End Dicty News, volume 16, number 8]
