Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 16, number 5
March 3, 2001

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page
"http://dictybase.org"

==============
  Abstracts
==============

Dictyostelium Cells' Cytoplasm as Active Viscoplastic Body

Wolfgang Feneberg*, Monika Westphal§ and Erich Sackmann*

* Technische Universitaet Muenchen, Department of Physics E22,
James-Franck-Strasse, D-85748 Garching, Germany
§ Max-Planck-Institut fuer Biochemie, Research Group of Cell Dynamics,
D-82152 Martinsried, Germany

European Biophysics Journal, in press.  

Abstract:

We applied a recently developed microrheology technique based on colloidal
magnetic tweezers to measure local viscoelastic moduli and active forces in
cells of dictyostelium discoideum. The active transport of nonmagnetic
beads taken up by phagocytosis was analyzed by single particle tracking
which allowed to measure the length of straight steps and the corresponding
velocities of the movements. The motion consists of a superposition of
nearly straight long-range steps (step length in the micrometer range) and
local random walks (step widths about 0.1 micro m). The velocities for the
former type of motion range from 1 to 3 micro m/s. They decrease with
increasing bead size and are attributed to rapid active transport along
microtubuli. The short-range local motions exhibit velocities of less than
0.5mm/s and reflect the internal dynamics of the cytoplasm.
          Viscoelastic response curves were measured by application of
force pulses with amplitudes varying between 50pN and 400pN. Analysis of
the response curves in terms of mechanical equivalent circuits yielded
cytoplasmic viscosities varying between 10 and 350Pa×s. Simultaneous
analysis of the response curves and of the bead trajectories showed that
the motion of the beads is determined by the local yield stress within the
cytoplasmic scaffold and cisternae, which varies between sigma = 30Pa×m and
250Pa×m. The motion of intra-cellular particles is interpreted in terms of
visco-plastic behaviour and the apparent viscosity is a measure for the
reciprocal rate of bond-breakage within the cytoplasmatic network. The
viscoelastic moduli are interpreted as dynamic quantities which depend
sensitively on the amplitude of the forces and the rate of bond-breakage is
determined by the Arrhenius-Kramers law with the activation energy being
reduced by the work performed by the applied force. In agreement with
previous work we provide evidence that the myosin II deficient cells
exhibit higher yield stresses suggesting that the function of myosin II as
cross-linker is taken over by the other (non-active) cross-linkers.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tyrosine phosphorylation-independent nuclear translocation of a 
Dictyostelium STAT in response to DIF signalling


*Masashi Fukuzawa, *Tsuyoshi Araki, Iris Adrian and Jeffrey G. Williams+
                                        
School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, MSI/WTB Complex,
Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH UK
+ Corresponding author (j.g.williams@dundee.ac.uk)

*These two authors contributed equally to this work

Molecular Cell, in press

SUMMARY

We describe a Dictyostelium STAT, Dd-STATc, that regulates the speed of 
early development and the timing of terminal differentiation. Dd-STATc 
also functions as a repressor, that directs graded expression of the ecmA 
gene in different prestalk cell populations. Developing Dictyostelium cells 
produce a chlorinated hexaphenone, DIF, that directs prestalk cell 
differentiation. Dd-STATc is tyrosine phosphorylated, dimerises and 
translocates to the nucleus when cells are exposed to DIF. Surprisingly 
however, SH2 domain-phosphotyrosine interaction is not necessary for the 
DIF-induced nuclear translocation of Dd-STATc. In this respect Dd-STATc 
activation resembles several recently described, non-canonical mammalian 
STAT signalling processes. We show instead that DIF mediates nuclear 
translocation via sequences located in the divergent, N-terminal half 
of the Dd-STATc molecule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Receptor Mediated Activation of Heterotrimeric G-proteins in Living Cells
Chris Janetopoulos*, Tian Jin*, and Peter Devreotes*+
Department of Biological Chemistry
Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions
Baltimore, MD 21205
*Present address: Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Johns Hopkins 
Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD 21205

Science, In Press

Abstract

Receptor mediated activation of heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide 
binding proteins (G-proteins) was visualized in living D. discoideum 
cells by monitoring fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) between 
a- and b- subunits fused to cyan and yellow fluorescent proteins.  The 
G-protein heterotrimer rapidly dissociated and reassociated upon addition 
and removal of chemoattractant.  During continuous stimulation G-protein 
activation reached a dose-dependent steady state level.  Even though 
physiological responses subsided, the activation did not decline. Thus, 
adaptation occurs at another point in the signaling pathway and occupied 
receptors, whether or not phosphorylated, catalyze the G-protein cycle.  
Construction of similar energy transfer pairs of mammalian G-proteins 
should enable direct in situ mechanistic studies and applications such 
as drug screening and searching for ligands for new G-protein coupled 
receptors.


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

[End Dicty News, volume 16, number 5]
