Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 16, number 2
January 27, 2001

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page
"http://dicty.cmb.northwestern.edu/dicty"

==============
  Abstracts
==============

Protein tyrosine phosphatase PTP1 negatively regulates Dictyostelium STATa
and is required for proper cell-type proportioning

Anne Early(1), Marianne Gamper(2), John Moniakis(2), Eugene Kim(2), Tony
Hunter(3), Jeffrey G. Williams(4), and Richard A. Firtel(2)

1 MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology and Department of Biology,
University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK.
2 Section of Cell and Developmental Biology and the Center for Molecular
Genetics, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla,
CA 92093-0634, USA.
3 Salk Institute, 10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla CA 92037-1099, USA.
4 University of Dundee, MSI/WTB Complex, Dow Street, Dundee, DD1 5EH, UK.

Developmental Biology, in press

Abstract

The protein tyrosine phosphatase PTP1, which mediates reversible
phosphorylation on tyrosine, has been shown to play an important regulatory
role during Dictyostelium development. Mutants lacking PTP1 develop more
rapidly than normal, while strains that overexpress PTP display aberrant
morphology. However, the signalling pathways involved have not been
characterized. In re-examining these strains, we have found that there is
an inverse correlation between levels of PTP1 activity, the extent of
tyrosine phosphorylation on Dictyostelium STATa after treatment with cAMP,
and the proportion of the slug population exhibiting STATa nuclear
enrichment in vivo. This suggests that PTP1 acts to attenuate the tyrosine
phosphorylation of STATa and downstream STATa-mediated pathways. Consistent
with this, we shown that when PTP1 is overexpressed, there is increased
expression of a prestalk cell marker at the slug posterior, a phenocopy of
STATa null slugs. In ptp1 null strains, STATa tyrosine phosphorylation and
nuclear enrichment in the slug anterior is increased. There is also a
change in the prestalk to prespore cell ratio. Synergy experiments suggest
that this is due to a cell-autonomous defect in forming the subset of
prespore cells that are located in the anterior prespore region.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transcript mapping and processing of mitochondrial RNA in Dictyostelium
discoideum

C. BARTH1, U. GREFERATH2, M. KOTSIFAS1, Y. TANAKA3, S. ALEXANDER4, 
H. ALEXANDER4 AND P. R. FISHER1


1 Department of Microbiology, La Trobe University, Bundoora 3083,
Melbourne, Australia
2 Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Melbourne, Australia
3 Institute of Biological Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-8572, Japan
4 Division of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO
65211-7400

Current Genetics, in press.

ABSTRACT 

The circular mitochondrial genome of Dictyostelium discoideum has a size of
55,564 base pairs. We present here a complete and detailed transcription
map of the mitochondrial DNA. Eight major, polycistronic transcripts
encoding polypeptides, ribosomal RNAs and interspersed transfer RNAs were
identified in Northern hybridization studies. Most of these polycistronic
transcripts are subsequently processed into smaller mono-, di- or
tricistronic RNAs. In some cases the maturation involves endonucleolytic
cleavage of the transcripts using transfer RNAs as excision signals. Primer
extension experiments mapped the 5' ends of the transcripts, which may
represent transcription initiation sites. Two of the polycistronic
transcripts were found to be overlapping. Based on sequence alignments of
the potential transcription start sites a short oligonucleotide consensus
initiation sequence has been identified which did not reveal any
significant sequence homologies to known promoter regions from other
organisms.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

An SH2-domain-containing kinase negatively regulates the 
phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase pathway


John Moniakis, Satoru Funamoto, Masashi Fukuzawa, Jill Meisenhelder, 
Tsuyoshi Araki, Tomoaki Abe, Ruedi Meili, Tony Hunter, Jeffrey Williams, 
and Richard A. Firtel

Genes and Development, in press.

ABSTRACT

SHK1 is a novel dual-specificity kinase that contains an SH2 domain in its 
C-terminal region. We demonstrate that SHK1 is required for proper chemotaxis 
and phagocytosis.  shk1 null cells lack polarity, move very slowly, and 
exhibit an elevated and temporally extended chemoattractant-mediated 
activation of the kinase Akt/PKB.  GFP fusions of the PH domain of Akt/PKB 
or the PH-domain-containing protein CRAC, which become transiently associated 
with the plasma membrane after a global stimulation with a chemoattractant, 
remain associated with the plasma membrane for an extended period of time in 
shk1 null cells.  These results suggest that SHK1 is a negative regulator of 
the PI3 kinase pathway.  Furthermore, when a chemoattractant gradient is 
applied to a wild-type cell, these PH-domain-containing proteins and the 
F-actin binding protein coronin localize to its leading edge, but in an 
shk1 null cell they become randomly associated with the plasma membrane 
and cortex, irrespective of the direction of the chemoattractant gradient, 
suggesting SHK1 is required for the proper spatio-temporal control of 
F-actin levels in chemotaxing cells.  Consistent with such functions, SHK1 
is localized at the plasma membrane/cortex and we show that its SH2 domain 
is required for this localization and the proper function of SHK1. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

p110-related PI 3-kinases regulate phagosome-phagosome fusion 
and phagosomal pH through a PKB/Akt dependent pathway in Dictyostelium.

Adam C. Rupper1,2, Juan M. Rodriguez-Paris2, Bryon D. Grove3 and James 
A. Cardelli1,2,4

1Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 2Feist-Weiller Cancer Center, 
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, Louisiana 71130; 
3Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of North Dakota, Grand 
Forks, North Dakota 58202

Journal of Cell Science (in press)

ABSTRACT

The Dictyostelium p110-related PI 3-kinases, PIK1 and PIK2, regulate the 
endosomal pathway and the actin cytoskeleton, but do not significantly 
regulate internalization of particles in D. discoideum.  Bacteria 
internalized into Dddpik1/ddpik2 cells or cells treated with  PI 3-kinase 
inhibitors  remained intact as single particles in phagosomes with closely 
associated membranes after 2 hours of internalization, while in control 
cells, bacteria appeared degraded in multi-particle spacious phagosomes.  
Addition of LY294002 to control cells, after 60 minutes of chase, blocked 
formation of spacious phagosomes, suggesting PI 3-kinases acted late to 
regulate spacious phagosome formation.  Phagosomes purified from control 
and drug treated cells contained equivalent levels of lysosomal proteins, 
including the proton pump complex, and were acidic, but in drug treated 
cells and Dddpik1/ddpik2 cells phagosomal pH was significantly more acidic 
during maturation than the pH of control phagosomes.  Inhibition of 
phagosomal maturation by LY294002 was overcome by increasing phagosomal 
pH with NH4Cl, suggesting that an increase in pH might trigger homotypic 
phagosome fusion.  A pkbA null cell line (PKB/Akt) reproduced the phenotype 
described for cells treated with PI 3-kinase inhibitors and Dddpik1/ddpik2 
cells.  We propose that PI 3-kinases, through a PKB/Akt dependent pathway, 
directly regulate homotypic fusion of single particle containing phagosomes 
to form multi-particle, spacious phagosomes, possibly through the regulation 
of phagosomal pH.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Environmental Regulation of Pathways Controlling Sporulation, Dormancy, 
and Germination Utilizes Bacterial-like Signaling Complexes in Dictyostelium.

David A. Cottera, Dana C. Mahadeoa, David N. Cervia, Yoshiro Kishib, Keith 
Galec, Todd Sandsa, and Masazumi Sameshimab.

aDepartment of Biological Sciences, University of Windsor, Windsor, Ontario, 
Canada
bDepartment of Cell Biology, The Tokyo Metropolitan Institute for Medical 
Science, Tokyo Metropolitan Organization for Medical Research, Honkomagome, 
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
cDepartment of Natural and Quantitative Sciences, Dubai, United Arab Emirates

Protist Vol 151, 111-126

Summary:

In the following review we have examined and compiled information regarding 
the later stages of development in Dictyostelium, primarily focussing on 
spore formation, dormancy and germination.  We have given an overview on the 
current understanding on how these processes function based on genetic, 
biochemical, and physiological evidence contributed to the field.  We have 
also compared the interaction of the control of these events compared with 
other similar systems such as Bacillus.  Histidine kinases play a central 
role in the development of Dictyostelium.  We have proposed a network model 
of interacting signals that act through these histidine kinases to achieve 
and maintain spore dormancy.  The complex process of spore germination relies 
on many different factors including intrinsic and external signals.  We have 
established a model for spore germination that incorporates our current 
understanding as well as proposed signaling processes that may be involved.


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

[End Dicty News, volume 16, number 2]
