Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 10, number 13
May 9, 1998

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

===========
 Abstracts
===========
 
Identification and Analysis of a Gene that is Essential for Morphogenesis
and Prespore Cell Differentiation in Dictyostelium

Hiroo Yasukawa, Sudhasri Mohanty, and Richard A. Firtel

Dept. of Biology, Center for Molecular Genetics, UCSD, La Jolla

DEVELOPMENT, in press

SUMMARY

   We have identified a gene (PslA) that is expressed throughout Dictyostelium 
development and encodes a novel protein that is required for proper aggregation 
and subsequent cell-type differentiation and morphogenesis.  pslA null  (pslA-) 
cells produce large aggregation streams under conditions in which wild-type 
cells form discrete aggregates.  Tips form along the stream, elongate to produce 
a finger, and eventually form a terminal structure that lacks a true sorus 
(spore head).  More than half of the cells remain as a mass at the base of the 
developing fingers.  The primary defect in the pslA- strain is the inability to 
induce prespore cell differentiation.  Analyses of gene expression show a complete 
lack of prespore-specific gene expression and no mature spores are produced.  
In chimeras with wild-type cells, pslA-  cells form the prestalk domain and normal, 
properly proportioned fruiting bodies can be produced.  This indicates that pslA- 
cells are able to interact with wild-type cells and regulate patterning, even though 
pslA- cells are unable to express prespore cell-type-specific genes, do not 
participate in prespore cell differentiation, and do not produce pslA- spores in the 
chimeras.  While pslA- cells produce mature, vacuolated stalk cells during 
multicellular development, pslA- cells are unable to do so in vitro in response 
to exogenous DIF (a morphogen required for prestalk and stalk cell differentiation).  
These results indicate that pslA- cells exhibit a defect in the prestalk/stalk cell 
pathways under these experimental conditions.  Our results suggest that PslA’s primary 
function is to regulate prespore-cell determination very early in the prespore pathway 
via a cell-autonomous mechanism, possibly at the time of the initial prestalk/prespore 
cell-fate decision.  Indirect immunofluorescence of myc-tagged PslA localizes the 
protein to the nucleus, suggesting that PslA may function to control the prespore 
pathway at the level of transcription.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

The helC gene encodes a putative DEAD-box RNA helicase
required for development in Dictyostelium discoideum

Laura M. Machesky, Robert H. Insall and Robert R. Kay

Current Biology, vol. 8 iss. 10, in press

Abstract

DEAD-box RNA helicases, defined by the sequence Asp-Glu-Ala-Asp (DEAD, in 
single-letter amino-acid code), regulate RNA unwinding and secondary structure 
in an ATP-dependent manner in vitro and control mRNA stability and protein 
translation. Both yeast and mammals have large families of DEAD-box proteins, 
many of unknown function. We have disrupted a Dictyostelium discoideum gene, 
helC, which encodes helicase C, a member of the DEAD-box family of RNA helicases 
that shows strong homology to the product of the essential Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
gene dbp5 and to related helicases in mouse and Schizosaccharomyces pombe. The 
HelC protein also shows weaker homology to the translation initiation factor eIF-4a. 
Other DEAD-box-containing proteins, which are less closely related to HelC, have been 
implicated in developmental roles in Drosophila and Xenopus laevis; one example is 
the Xenopus Vasa-like protein (XVLP).  In Drosophila and Xenopus, Vasa and XVLP, 
respectively, are specifically expressed in germ cells and are required for the 
establishment of tissue polarity during development. In yeast, DEAD-box helicases 
such as Prp8 are components of the spliceosome and connect pre-mRNA splicing with 
the cell cycle.  Disruption of the helC gene in D. discoideum led to developmental 
asynchrony, failure to differentiate and aberrant morphogenesis. We postulate that 
one reason for the existence of large families of homologous DEAD-box proteins in 
yeast, mammals and Dictyostelium could be that some DEAD-box proteins have develop-
mentally specific roles regulating protein translation or mRNA stability.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

LagC-Null and GBF-Null Define Key Steps in the Morphogenesis of Dictyostelium 
Mounds.

Sujatha Sukumaran, Jason M. Brown, Richard A. Firtel and James G. McNally

Devel. Biol., in press.

ABSTRACT

The transition to multicellularity is a key feature of the Dictyostelium life-
cycle, and two genes, gbf and lagC, are known to play pivotal roles in 
regulating this developmental switch.  lagC-null and gbf-null cells fail to 
induce cell-type-specific genes ordinarily expressed during multicellular 
development.  The null mutants also share a similar morphological phenotype: 
mutant cells repeatedly aggregate to form a loose mound, disperse, and reform 
a mound, rather than proceeding to form a tip.  To characterize defects in 
morphogenesis in these mutants, we examined cell motion in the mutant mounds.  
In analogy with the failed transition in gene expression, we found that lagC-null 
and gbf-null mounds failed to make a morphogenetic transition from random to 
rotational motion normally observed in the parent strain.  One reason for this 
was the inability of the mutant mounds to establish a single, dominant signaling-
wave center.  This defect of lagC-null or gbf-null cells could be overcome by the 
addition of adenosine, which alters cAMP signaling, but then even in the presence 
of apparently normal signaling waves, cell motility was still aberrant.  This 
motility defect, as well as the signaling-wave defect, could be overcome in 
lagC-null cells by overexpression of GBF, suggesting that lagC is dispensable 
if GBF protein levels are high enough.  This set of morphogenetic defects that 
we have observed help define key steps in mound morphogenesis.  These include 
the establishment of a dominant signaling-wave center and the capacity of cells 
to move directionally within the cell mass in response to guidance cues.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

[End Dicty News, volume 10, number 13]

