Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 10, number 7
February 28, 1998

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

===========
 Abstracts
===========
 
Isolation of nucleation-competent centrosomes from Dictyostelium 
discoideum

Ralph Graef, Ursula Euteneuer, Masahiro Ueda and Manfred Schliwa

Adolf-Butenandt-Institut/Zellbiologie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität
München, Schillerstr. 42, D-80336 München, Germany.

Eur. J. Cell Biol., in press

   The centrosome of Dictyostelium discoideum is a box-shaped, layered 
core structure surrounded by a corona which is made up of dense nodules 
embedded in amorphous material. It is also known as nucleus-associated 
body. Because of its tight association with the nucleus the centrosome 
has resisted so far all attempts for isolation in sufficient purity 
and quantity for biochemical analysis. Here we report on the large-
scale isolation of D. discoideum centrosomes after treatment of 
nucleus-centrosome complexes with a buffer containing sodium 
pyrophosphate. Following heparin treatment and a filtration step, 
centrosomes were further purified by density gradient centrifugation. 
Immunofluorescence analysis of the isolated centrosomes revealed 
the presence of the D. discoideum 350-kDa antigen, a centrosomal
marker protein, g-tubulin, and the D. discoideum homologues of 
pericentrin, Spc110p, and Cdc31p. The structural integrity of the 
isolated centrosomes was demonstrated by confocal laser microscopy 
and electron microscopy.  Microtubule nucleation assays with purified 
pig brain tubulin showed that the isolation procedure did not only 
preserve the structure but also the functionality of the isolated 
centrosomes. D. discoideum centrosomes should now become an 
attractive new model system in addition to, and for comparison 
with, centriolar centrosomes and yeast spindle pole bodies.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Calcium  levels  correlate with cell cycle phase and  affect  the 
level of the cyclin B transcript in Dictyostelium discoideum.  

M. Azhar(a), M. Krefft(b), S. Saran(c), G. Weeks(d), and  
Vidyanand Nanjundiah(a)
   
a Developmental Biology and Genetics Laboratory, Indian  Institute 
of Science, Bangalore  560012, India
b Fachhochschule    Rheinland-Pfalz,   Abteilung    Bingen,    FB-
Verfahrenstechnik, Berlinerstrasse 109, Germany
c School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi-
11067, India
d Department  of  Microbiology and Immunology  and  Department  of 
Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver BC V6T, 
Canada

FEMS Microbiology Letters, in press

Abstract

   In pre-aggregation  amoebae  of  D.   discoideum,   phenotypic 
differences  with respect to cellular Ca2+ and cell cycle  phases 
act  coordinately and bias post-aggregative cell-type choice.  We 
have  shown  that  it  is  possible  to  enhance  (/reduce)   the 
proportion  of prestalk cells in the slug and generate  a  stalky 
(/spory)  phenotype in D. discoideum  by artificially  increasing 
(/decreasing) cellular Ca2+ by using the right combination of the 
calcium ionophore A23187 and Ca2+-EGTA buffers. Also, sequestered 
and  free calcium are both relatively high or relatively  low  in 
the same cell. This enables us to make use of   chlortetracycline 
(CTC) fluorescence, which is primarily a correlate of sequestered 
calcium, indirectly to monitor overall cellular calcium. Based on 
the  temporal  pattern  of  (3-H)  thymidine  uptake   and  MUD-9 
antibody staining, we infer that Ca2+ levels are highest at the S 
phase  of the cell cycle. Upon increasing the level of Ca2+  with 
the help of A23187, there is a 2 to 3-fold decrease in the cyclin 
B  (clb1)  mRNA  level;  the cdc2 mRNA  level  shows  a  marginal 
decrease.  A  decrease  in  cellular  Ca2+  does  not  appear  to 
influence either the clb1 or the cdc2 mRNA levels. These  results 
suggest  that the effect of Ca2+ and the cell cycle on cell  fate 
could  be  exerted  at the level  of  transcription,  or  message 
stability, of specific genes. 

-------------------------------------------------------------------------



Presteady-state of reaction of Nucleoside Diphosphate Kinase with anti-HIV
Nucleotides

SCHNEIDER, B. (1)  , XU, Y.W., (2)  SELLAM, O., (1)  SARFATI, R., (1)
JANIN, J., (2)  VERON, M. (1)  & DEVILLE-BONNE, D. (1)

(1) Institut Pasteur,  Paris and (2) CNRS,  Gif-sur-Yvette, France

J. Biol. Chem., in press

SUMMARY:

   The presteady-state reaction of Dictyostelium nucleoside 
diphosphate (NDP) kinase with dideoxynucleotide triphosphates 
(ddNTP) was studied by quenching of protein fluorescence after 
manual mixing or by stopped-flow.  The fluorescence signal, which 
is correlated with the phosphorylation state of the catalytic 
histidine in the enzyme active site, decreases upon ddNTP addition 
according to a monoexponential time course. The pseudo-first order 
rate constant was determined for different concentrations of the various 
ddNTPs and was found to be saturable. The data are compatible with a
two-step reaction scheme where fast association of the enzyme with the
dideoxynucleotide is followed by a rate-limiting phosphorylation step. 
The rate constants and dissociation equilibrium constants determined 
for each dideoxynucleotide were correlated with the steady-state 
kinetic parameters measured in the enzymatic assay in the presence 
of the two substrates. It is shown that ddNTPs are poor substrates 
for NDP kinase with a rate of phosphate transfer of 0.02 to 3.5 s-1 
and a KS of 1 to 5 mM. The equilibrium dissociation constants for 
ADP, GDP, ddADP and ddGDP were also determined by fluorescence 
titration of a mutant F64W NDP kinase where the introduction of a 
tryptophan at the nucleotide binding site provides a direct 
spectroscopic probe. The lack of the 3'OH in ddNTP causes a ten fold
increase in KD. Contrary to « natural » NTPs, NDP kinase discriminates
between various ddNTPs, with ddGTP the more efficient  and ddCTP  
the least efficient substrate within a range of 100 in kcat values.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Fucose-beta-1-P-Ser is a new type of glycosylation: Using antibodies to
identify a novel structure in Dictyostelium discoideum and study multiple
types of fucosylation during growth and development

Geetha Srikrishna, Liying Wang, and Hudson H. Freeze
The Burnham Institute, La Jolla Cancer Research Center, La Jolla,
California 92037

Three antibodies that recognize distinct fucose epitopes were used to 
study fucosylation during growth and development of Dictyostelium 
discoideum.  mAb83.5 is known to recognize an undefined "fucose epitope" 
on several proteins with serine-rich domains, while mAb CAB4, and 
a component of anti-horse-radish peroxidase, specifically recognize 
Fuca1,6GlcNAc and Fuca1,3GlcNAc residues respectively in the core 
of N-linked oligosaccharides.  We show that mAb 83.5 defines a new 
type of O-glycosylation. Serine-containing peptides incubated with 
GDPb[3H]Fuc and microsomes formed two fucosylated products. A neutral 
product accounting for 30% of the label did not react with the 
antibody, while the rest of the label was incorporated into a 
charged product which contained all the mAb83.5 reactive material. 
b-elimination of the labeled peptide or endogenous products produced 
[3H]Fuc-1-P, indicating phosphodiester linkage to serine. Fucb-1-P 
and GDP-bFuc at 100µM blocked mAb83.5 binding to endogenous and 
peptide products, but their a-linked anomers did not.  Electrospray 
ionization mass spectra of the neutral and anionic labeled
products showed major peaks of mass units corresponding to O-Fuc-Ser
peptide and O-Fuc-phospho-Ser peptide respectively. The activity of
Fuc-phosphotransferase exactly paralleled the accumulation of reactive
glycans during growth and development. The expressions of N-glycan core
Fuca1,6GlcNAc and Fuca1,3GlcNAc, and their respective fucosyl transferase
activities were also synchronous, but their developmental regulation
differed from one another. Fuca1,6GlcNAc was expressed maximally during
growth, but declined during development. In contrast core Fuca1,3GlcNAc
epitopes were expressed almost exclusively during development. These
findings provide direct evidence for a novel type of O-phosphofucosylation,
demonstrate the existence of an O-fucosyl transferase, and identify two
different types of core fucosylation in the N-glycans of Dictyostelium.


-------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 10, number 7]

