Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 10, number 16
June 27, 1998

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

===========
 Abstracts
===========
 
A New Way of Following Individual Cells in the Migrating Slugs of
Dictyostelium discoideum

J. T. Bonner

Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Princeton University,
Princeton. NJ 08544

PNAS, in press.

Abstract:

   In the development of the cellular slime mold D. discoideum there 
is a stage in which the aggregated amoebae form a migrating slug that 
moves forward in a polar fashion, showing sensitive orientation to 
environmental cues, as well as early signs of differentiation into 
anterior prestalk and posterior prespore cells.  Heretofore it has 
been difficult to follow the movement of the individual cells within 
the slug, but a new method is described in which small, flat (one 
cell thick) slugs are produced in a glass-mineral oil interface where 
one can follow the movement of all the cells.  Observations of time 
lapse videos reveal the following facts about slug migration:  1) While 
the posterior cells move straight forward, the anterior cells swirl 
about rapidly in a chaotic fashion.  2) Turning involves shifting the 
high point of these hyperactive cells.  3)  Both the anterior and the 
posterior cells move forward on their own power as the slug moves forward.  
4)  There are no visible regular oscillations within the slug.  5)  The 
number of prestalk and prespore cells is proportional for a range of sizes 
of these mini slugs.  All of these observations on thin slugs are consistent 
with what one finds in normal, three dimensional slugs.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Blasticidin resistance cassette in symmetrical polylinkers for insertional
inactivaton of genes in Dictyostelium 

F. Pùta, CJ. Zeng*

Department of Physiology and Developmental Biology, Charles University, 
Praha, Czech Republic; Department of Genetics, University of Kassel, 
Kassel, Germany

Folia Biologica, in press

ABSTRACT

   In Dictyostelium discoideum inactivation of developmentally regulated 
genes via homologous recombination has become an important tool in studying 
systematically the entire developmental program of this model organism. The 
Dictyostelium genome is very A/T-rich, however, which presents obstacles to 
the preparation of knockout constructs. The coding regions offer few suitable 
restriction sites and the  low complexity intergenic regions do not guarantee 
specificity of recombination.  We present here the preparation of plasmids 
pBsR479, pBsR503, and pBsR519, in which a blasticidin resistance-cassette is 
positioned in the center of various symmetrical polylinkers. This design 
simplifies the cloning process and gives more flexibility in positioning the 
selectable marker within the coding regions.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Detection of subtles phenotypes: the case of the cell adhesion molecule 
csA in Dictyostelium.

Eleonora Ponte*, Enrico Bracco*, Jan Faix# and Salvatore Bozzaro*Ý

*Dipartimento di Scienze Cliniche e Biologiche, Università di Torino -
Ospedale S. Luigi, 10043-Orbassano (Italy) and #Max-Planck-Institut fuer
Biochemie, D-82152 Martinsried (Federal Republic of Germany

PNAS, in press

ABSTRACT

   Dictyostelium amoebae aggregate into a multicellular organism by 
cAMP-driven chemotaxis and cell-cell adhesion. Cell adhesion is mediated 
by an EDTA-sensitive and an EDTA-resistant adhesion system. The latter is 
developmentally-regulated and triggered by homophilic interactions of the 
membrane glycoprotein csA; upon disruption of the encoding gene, EDTA-
resistant contacts fail to form. Nevertheless, csA-null cells under usual 
laboratory conditions aggregate normally and complete development.  By 
using experimental conditions that reproduce more closely the habitat of 
Dictyostelium amoebae, evidence is provided that csA is required for 
development, and that its expression confers a selective advantage to 
populations of wild-type cells over csA-null mutants.  The latter display 
reduced cell-cell adhesion, increased adhesiveness to the substratum and 
slower motility, which lead to their sorting out from aggregating wild-
type cells.  It is proposed that the experimental conditions commonly used 
in the laboratory are not stringent enough to assess the developmental 
role of csA and other proteins.  The new assay described can be used to 
detect subtle phenotypes, to re-examine the developmental role of 
apparently non-essential genes and to test the validity of recent models 
on emergence and maintenance of apparent genetic redundancy.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Overexpression of CAF1 encoding a novel Ca2+-binding protein stimulates 
the transition of Dictyostelium cells from growth to differentiation

Mikiko Itoh, Maiko Noguchi and Yasuo Maeda*

Biological Institute, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University, 
Aoba, Sendai 980-8578, Japan.

Develop. Growth & Differ., in press

SUMMARY

   Among genes expressed associated with the switch-over of Dictyostelium 
cells from cell proliferation to differentiation, the Calfumirin-1 (CAF1) 
gene has been shown to be preferentially expressed at the initial step of 
differentiation and encode a novel Ca2+-binding protein (Abe & Maeda 1995). 
To analyze precisely the function of CAF1, transformants overexpressing 
the CAF1 mRNA a t the vegetative growth phase and also CAF1-null mutants 
were prepared, and their developmental features were compared with those 
of parental wild-type cells. As a result, the CAF1-overexpression was 
found to promote cell differ entiation, possibly through prompt induction 
of the cAMP receptor 1 (CAR1) g ene expression. In addition, the CAF1-
overexpressing cells were able to diff erentiate even under low external 
Ca2+ ([Ca2+]e) conditions around 10-6M at which nontransformed wild-type 
cells never differentiated. Unexpectedly, how ever, the CAF1-null mutant 
produced by homologous recombination exhibited ap parently normal 
development to form fruiting bodies on non-nutrient agar. These results 
seems to indicate that the CAF1-overexpression has a stimulatory effect 
on differentiation, but that the CAF1 protein is not necessarily required 
for the phase-shift of cells from growth to differentiation.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

[End Dicty News, volume 10, number 16]

