Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 10, number 9
March 28, 1998

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

===========
 Abstracts
===========
 
LOCALISATION OF GLYCOPROTEINS CONTAINING TYPE 3 O-LINKED GLYCOSYLATION 
TO MULTILAMELLAR BODIES IN DICTYOSTELIUM DISCOIDEUM.  

Emslie, K.R., Birch, D., Champion, A.C. and Williams, K.L. *

Department of Biological Sciences, Macquarie University
Sydney NSW 2109

Int. J. Parasitology

ABSTRACT

   Glycosylation of proteins in Dictyostelium discoideum has been 
recently classified into several types based on structural and 
mutational studies.  Type 3 O-linked glycosylation contains fucose and 
N-acetyl-glucosamine and is recognised by the carbohydrate-specific 
monoclonal antibody MUD 62. The developmentally regulated cysteine 
proteinase, ddCP38B, is the major protein recognised by both MUD 62 
and a second carbohydrate-specific monoclonal antibody, MUD 166, 
in vegetative cells using bacteria as a food source. Using 
immunofluorescence and immunogold labelling, glycoproteins carrying 
the MUD 62 and MUD 166-specific epitopes have been localised
intracellularly to the lysosomal network and multilamellar bodies 
of D. discoideum. These bodies contain remnants of undigested 
bacteria and are egested from the cell prior to starvation-induced 
aggregation. These results suggest that extracellular glycoproteins 
carrying the Type 3 O-linkage, such as ddCP38B, may not be secreted 
via the conventional pathway but may be released into the medium 
following targeting to the multilamellar bodies.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

A Distinct 14-Residue Site Triggers Coiled-Coil Formation in 
Cortexillin I

Michel O. Steinmetz1, Alexander Stock2, Therese Schulthess3, Ruth 
Landwehr3, Ariel Lustig3, Jan Faix2, Guenther Gerisch2, Ueli Aebi1, 
and Richard A. Kammerer3

1M.E. Mueller Institute for Microscopy, Biozentrum, University of Basel,
CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland, 2Max-Planck-Institut fuer Biochemie, D-82152
Martinsried, Germany, 3Department of Biophysical Chemistry, Biozentrum,
University of Basel, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland

EMBO J. in press. 

Abstract:

   We have investigated the assembly process of the Dictyostelium 
discoideum cortexillin I oligomerization domain (Ir) into a tightly 
packed two-stranded parallel coiled-coil structure using a variety of 
recombinant polypeptide chain fragments. The structures of these Ir 
fragments were analyzed by circular dichroism spectroscopy, analytical
ultracentrifugation, and electron microscopy. Deletion mapping 
identified a distinct 14-residue site, Arg311 to Asp324, within the 
Ir coiled coil which was absolutely necessary for dimer formation, 
indicating that heptad repeats, by themselves, are not sufficient 
for stable coiled-coil formation. Moreover, deletion of the six 
N-terminal heptad repeats of Ir led to the formation of a four-helix, 
rather than a two-helix structure, suggesting that the full-length 
cortexillin I coiled-coil domain behaves as a cooperative folding 
unit. Most interestingly, a 16-residue long peptide containing the 
distinct coiled-coil "trigger" site Arg311 to Asp324 yielded ~30% 
helix formation, as monomer, in aqueous solution. pH titration and
NaCl screening experiments revealed that the peptide's helicity depends
strongly on pH and ionic strength, indicating that electrostatic
interactions by charged side chains within the peptide are critical in
stabilizing its monomer helix. Taken together, these findings demonstrate
that Arg311 to Asp324 behaves as an autonomous helical folding unit, and
they further suggest that this distinct Ir segment controls the process 
of coiled-coil formation of cortexillin I. 

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Rules for the addition of O-linked N-acetylglucosamine to secreted
proteins in Dictyostelium discoideum: In vivo studies on glycosylation 
of mucin MUC1 and MUC2 repeats

Eva JUNG, Andrew A. GOOLEY, Nicolle H. PACKER, Peter KARUSO and Keith L.
WILLIAMS

MUCAB (Macquarie University Centre for Analytical Biotechnology),
School of Biological Sciences and School of Chemistry, Macquarie
University, Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia

Eur. J. Biochem., in press

One class of O-glycosylation in the simple eukaryote Dictyostelium
discoideum involves the addition of a single N-acetylglucosamine to 
serine and threonine residues on secreted or membrane bound proteins 
at an early stage of development. A previously developed in vivo 
approach for the identification of acceptor sites for O-glycosylation 
was used to further characterise the specificity of the UDP-GlcNAc: 
polypeptide N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase(s). Glutathione-S-transferase
fusion proteins were constructed to express and secrete the mucin 
peptide repeat for MUC1 (PDT1RPAPGS1T2APPAHGVT3S2A) and a MUC2-like 
peptide (PT1T2T3PIT4T5T6T7T8T9VT10PT11PT12PT13GT14QT15), respectively.
Monosaccharide analysis, electrospray-ionisation mass spectrometry and
protein sequencing showed that the modification is a single
N-acetylglucosamine attached to certain threonine residues. The MUC1 
repeat was glycosylated on T2 and T3 and there were no modifications 
on T1 or on S1 and S2. The MUC2 glycopeptide was glycosylated on T1, 
T3, T5, T7, T9, T10, T11, T12, T13 and T14. Our results show that the 
D. discoideum glycosylation apparatus incorporates GlcNAc residues 
into peptide sequences similar to those reported for the addition 
of GalNAc residues in mammalian tissues. The anomeric linkage of 
the GlcNAc residues to the polypeptide chain was shown to be in 
alpha configuration as determined by NMR studies.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Spalten, a protein containing Galpha-protein-like and PP2C domains, is
essential for cell-type differentiation in Dictyostelium

Laurence Aubry and Richard A. Firtel

Genes and Deveopment, in press

ABSTRACT

  We have identified a novel gene, Spalten (Spn) that is essential
for Dictyostelium multicellular development.  Spn encodes a protein 
with an N-terminal domain that shows very high homology to Galpha-
protein subunits, a highly charged inter-region, and a C-terminal 
domain that encodes a functional PP2C.  Spn is essential for 
development past the mound stage, being required cell autonomously 
for prestalk gene expression and non-autonomously for prespore cell 
differentiation.  Mutational analysis demonstrates that the PP2C 
domain is the effector domain and is essential for Spn function, 
while the Galpha-like domain is required for membrane targeting 
and regulation of Spn function.  Moreover, Spn carrying mutations
in the Galpha-like domain that do not affect membrane targeting but 
affect specificity of guanine nucleotide binding in known GTP-binding 
proteins are unable to fully complement the spn- phenotype, suggesting 
that the Galpha-like domain  regulates Spn function either directly or 
indirectly by mediating its interactions with other proteins.  Our 
results suggest that Spn encodes a signaling molecule with a 
potentially novel Galpha-like regulatory domain.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 10, number 9]

