Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 10, number 3
January 24, 1998

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

==============
 Announcement
==============

Motion Analysis of Living Cells

David R. Soll and Deborah Wessels, Editors

a book in the series Techniques in Modern Biomedical Microscopy

David M. Shotton, Series Editor, Wiley-Liss, Publisher

Most active cellular functions involve motion.  From such subtle
subcellular actions as the sorting and targeting of vesicles and
organelles leading to the release of harmones to the complex
rearrangements of a sphere of embryonic cells forming the body plan 
of a complete organism, motility of cells is exhibited along a wide 
range of observable behaviors.  Despite this phenomenon, however, the 
views of modern biology historically have been on static images and 
models constructed from biochemical evidence.

Motion Analysis of Living Cells is the first volumeto compile the 
latest research by prominent specialists in molecular and cell 
biology, presenting newly developed techniques for studying
cellular motions and critical analyses of the information these
techniques can yield.  Focusing on actin-based motility systems and
drawing on the latest advances in the techniques of biochemistry,
biophysics, microscopy, computer-assisted motion analysis, and
molecular genetics, the works in this collection will prove invaluable 
to future research in embryogenesis, cancer, and diseases related to 
the cellular immune system.

Among the topics covered:

** Bacterial motility and chemotaxis

** New technologies for characterizing motility-related parameters

** Methods for analyzing the cortical tension of normal cells compared 
to abnormal cells

** Model for how the cell extends a pseudopod

** Computer-assisted analyses of cytoskeletal mutants of Dictyostelium 
discoideum

** Emerging methods for studying how cells respond to topographical 
cues at the substratum

** Polymerization of host actin to facilitate propulsion

** Genetic approaches to the regulatory mechanisms involved in early
zebra fish morphogenesis and specification of cell fates

** Specific examples of single cell motility in embryogenesis

A groundbreaking treatment of motion analysis of animal cells,
Motion Analysis of Living Cells is a thorough review
for professional as well as a comprehensive introduction for students
and researchers in the field.  It is must reading for cell and
developmental biologists, microbiologists, immunologists,
neuroscientists, cancer researchers, zoologists, and basic researchers 
in reproductive medicine.  Three chapters in the book deal directly 
with Dictyostelium discoideum motility.  The preface of the 
book, chapters contained, as well as introductions of selected chapters 
are provided on the W.M. Keck Dynamic Image Analysis Facility home 
page at http://www.uiowa.edu/~keck/


===========
 Abstracts
===========

Retrotransposable elements in the Dictyostelium discoideum genome

THOMAS WINCKLER

Institut fuer Pharmazeutische Biologie, Universitaet Frankfurt/M. 
(Biozentrum), Marie-Curie-Strasse 9, D-60439 Frankfurt/M, Germany

Cell. Mol. Life Sci. (formerly Experientia), in press

Abstract:

   Repetitive DNA is a major component of any living cell. In 
eukaryotes retrotransposable el ements make up several percent of 
the genome size, and consequently, retroelements are often identified 
in experiments aimed to establish physical maps and whole genome 
sequences.  In this review recent progress in the characterization 
of retrotransposable elements in th e genome of the eukaryotic 
microorganism Dictyostelium discoideum is summarized with a focus 
on retroelements which integrate near transfer RNA genes with 
intriguing position specificity.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Structural Characterization of a Dynein Motor Domain.

Samso, M., Radermacher, M., Frank, J., & Koonce, M.P.

Division of Molecular Medicine, Wadsworth Center, Albany, NY 12201-0509

J. Mol. Biol., in press.

ABSTRACT.

   Cytoplasmic dynein is a microtubule-based mechanochemical protein 
that plays an essential role in cell division, vesicle transport, and 
cytoplasmic membrane organization. As a molecular motor, dynein 
utilizes an ATP hydrolysis mechanism to bind and release microtubules 
and to undergo conformational changes that result in a net displacement 
towards the microtubule’s minus end. To visualize structural features 
of this motor protein, we have begun to characterize the dynein head 
domain by electron microscopy and image processing. Transmission 
electron microscopy of negatively-stained native dynein from 
Dictyostelium has been performed and images of the head domain 
have been aligned and analyzed with the software SPIDER. The 
resulting 2D averages show an oblong round shape composed of 7-8 
globular domains or lobes that encircle a stain-filled area. A 
recombinant 380 kDa fragment of the dynein heavy chain encodes just 
the globular head domain; analysis of these particles reveals a high 
structural similarity with the native head domain. A prominent stalk 
can be seen in several projections of this fragment, suggesting a 
structure analogous to the B-link described for some axonemal dyneins. 
Single tilt pair images were used to compute low resolution 3D 
reconstructions of the dynein head domain. These show a flattened 
spheroidal shape of 13.5 nm in length with seven similar domains 
arranged in a ring. Slices through the reconstructions reveal a large 
central cavity. This is the first detailed description of the head 
domain structure for a dynein molecule. The presence of a central 
cavity and the outer globular features, along with its large size 
make dynein structurally distinct from either myosin or kinesin.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Cell-density sensing mediated by a G-protein-coupled receptor 
activating phospholipase C  

Derrick T. Brazill, David F. Lindsey, John D. Bishop, and Richard 
H. Gomer*

Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, MS-140, Rice University, 6100 S. Main Street  Houston, TX
77005-1892

J. Biol Chem, in press

Abstract

   When the unicellular eukaryote Dictyostelium discoideum starves, it
senses the local density of other starving cells by simultaneously
secreting and sensing a glycoprotein called conditioned medium factor
(CMF).  When the density of starving cells is high, the corresponding 
high density of CMF permits signal transduction through cAR1, the
chemoattractant cAMP receptor.  cAR1 activates a heterotrimeric G protein
whose alpha subunit is Galpha2.  CMF regulates cAMP signal transduction 
in part by regulating the lifetime of the cAMP-stimulated Galpha2-GTP
configuration.  We find here that GTPgammaS inhibits the binding of CMF 
to membranes, suggesting that the putative CMF receptor is coupled to 
a G protein.  Cells lacking Galpha1 (Ga1 null) do not exhibit GTPgammaS
inhibition of CMF binding and do not exhibit CMF regulation of cAMP 
signal transduction, suggesting that the putative CMF receptor interacts 
with Galpha1.  Work by others has suggested that Galpha1 inhibits 
phospholipase C (PLC), yet when cells lacking either Galpha1 or PLC 
were starved at high cell densities (and thus in the presence of CMF), 
they developed normally and had normal cAMP signal transduction.  We 
find that CMF activates PLC.  Galpha1 null cells starved in the absence 
or presence of CMF behave in a manner similar to control cells starved 
in the presence of CMF in that they extend pseudopods, have an activated 
PLC, have a low cAMP-stimulated GTPase, permit cAMP signal transduction, 
and aggregate.  Cells lacking Gbeta have a low PLC activity which 
cannot be stimulated by CMF.  Cells lacking PLC exhibit IP3 levels and 
cAMP-stimulated GTP hydrolysis rates intermediate to what is observed 
in wild-type cells starved in the absence or in the presence of an 
optimal amount of CMF.  We hypothesize that CMF binds to its receptor, 
releasing Gbetagamma from Galpha1.  This activates PLC, which causes the 
Galpha2 GTPase to be inhibited, prolonging the lifetime of the cAMP-
activated Galpha2-GTP configuration.  This, in turn, allows cAR1-
mediated cAMP signal transduction to take place. 

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 10, number 3]

