Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 10, number 1
January 3, 1998

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

A Happy and Productive New Year to everyone!

===========
 Abstracts
===========

The Signals for Starvation Response are Transduced through Elevated 
[Ca2+]i in Dictyostelium cells

YUKIKO TANAKA*, RYU ITAKURA, AIKO AMAGAI and YASUO MAEDA

Biological Institute, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University, 
Aoba, Sendai 980-77, Japan

Exp. Cell. Res., in press.

Abstract:

   The mechanism by which cells recognize starvation to allow subsequent
cellular development was analyzed using Dictyostelium discoideum, with 
special emphasis on Ca2+ as a crucial signal transducer in intra- and 
inter-cellular communications. As was expected, the cytosolic Ca2+-
concentration ([Ca2+]i) in aequorin-expressing cells (RHI76 derived 
from D. discoideum Ax-3) was temporarily increased, when 3-5 uM 
thapsigargin (Tg), a specific inhibitor of the Ca2+-ATPase was added 
into the cells incubated in semi-starvation medium (SS-medium: 1 
volume of growth medium plus 8 volumes either of 20 mM Na2/K-phosphate 
buffer (pH 6.2) or of Bonner's salt solution (BSS)). Essentially
the same result was obtained by the application of 5 uM nigericin (Ng), 
an acid ionophore to cells under the semi-starved condition. Here it 
is of interest to note that in the SS-medium Tg and Ng are capable of 
enhancing cell differentiation as exemplified well by the earlier 
acquisition of chemotactic response to cAMP, possibly inducing the 
starvation response through the [Ca2+]i increase. From Western blot 
analysis of phosphotyrosine (pTyr)-containing proteins using anti-pTyr 
antibody, it was found that the pTyr-phosphorylation levels of 97 kDa, 
80 kDa, and 45 kDa proteins increase specifically in response to 
starvation. Interestingly, Tg and Ng induced such a change of the
80 kDa protein in the cells incubated in the SS-medium. Taken together 
these results strongly suggest that the temporal increase of [Ca2+]i 
may be a matter of importance for signal transduction coupled with 
starvation response.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Co-expression of a constitutively active plasma membrane calcium pump 
with GFP identifies roles for intracellular calcium in controlling cell 
sorting during morphogenesis in Dictyostelium

Andrew B. Cubitt1, Indira Reddy2, Susan Lee1, James G. McNally2, and
Richard A. Firtel1

1Department of Biology, Center for Molecular Genetics, University of 
California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0634

and

2Department of Biology, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63130

Develop. Biol. in press

ABSTRACT

   To examine the potential role of calcium in regulating Dictyostelium 
development, we reduced free cytosolic and total cell Ca2+ in 
Dictyostelium cells by expressing a constitutively active form of a 
human erythrocyte plasma membrane calcium pump.  The pump-expressing 
cells lacked a thapsigargin-mediated increase in cytoplasmic calcium, 
consistent with a reduced level of total cellular Ca2+.  During 
aggregation, the cells initially form large number of aggregation 
centers, many of which coalesced to form mounds that were smaller 
than those of wild-type cells, and the cells did not exhibit the 
normal formation of elongated aggregation streams.  The majority of 
the mounds either arrested at this stage with the formation of small 
protrusions or formed very aberrant finger-like structures, indicating 
an essential role for cellular calcium in morphogenesis.  We used pump 
and wild-type cells differentially-labelled by expressing different 
wavelength (green and blue) forms of green fluorescent protein and 
three-dimensional (3-D) reconstruction of serial fluorescent imaging 
to visualize the movement of pump and wild-type cells within the 
aggregate.  The results showed that the pump cells exhibited very 
aberrant cell movement and sorting within the forming mound, suggesting 
that the reduced cytosolic calcium is affecting movement required for 
tip formation.  When allowed to form chimeric organisms with wild-type 
cells, pump cells preferentially localized to two bands, one of which 
was at the prestalk/prespore boundary and the other in the very 
posterior of the organism, also suggesting that pump cells are unable 
to properly sort.  Expression of the calcium pump had little effect on 
the induction of prestalk- or prespore-specific genes, whereas extended 
treatment with EGTA blocked induction of both classes of cell-type-
specific genes.  Our results suggest a role for intracellular Ca2+ in 
controlling cell sorting and morphogenesis in Dictyostelium.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Simultaneous detection of two GFP spectral mutants during in-vivo 
confocal microscopy of migrating Dictyostelium cells

Timo Zimmermann & Florian Siegert *

Zoologisches Institut, Universität München, Luisenstr. 14, 80333 München,
Germany
  
BioTechniques, in press

Abstract

   A method is described that allows simultaneous measurement of two 
spectrally distinguishable green fluorescent proteins (GFP) mutants 
with a confocal microscope. In contrast to previously described methods, 
neither UV excitation nor repetition of scans are required. Thus the 
method is well suited to the long-time observation of living cells in 
3D microscopy and time series recording, as demonstrated with GFP 
expressing Dictyostelium discoideum cells.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dictyostelium discoideum fatty acid amidase II (FAA II) has de-acylase 
activity on Rhizobium nodulation factors.

Peggy J. Sutherland1#, Andrea E. Tobin1#, Charles L. Rutherford2 
and Neil P.J. Price1*

1Department of Chemistry at SUNY College of Environmental Science 
and Forestry, Syracuse, NY 13210. 2Department of Biology Virginia Tech, 
Blacksburg Virginia 24061

Abstract

Dictyostelium discoideum (Amoebidae) secretes cell lysing enzymes; 
esterases, amidases and glycosylases, many of which degrade soil 
bacteria to provide a source of nutrients. Two of these enzymes, 
fatty acyl amidase I (FAA I) and fatty acyl amidase II (FAA II) act 
sequentially on the N-linked long chain acyl groups of lipid A, the 
lipid anchor of gram negative bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS). 
FAA I selectively hydrolyzes the 3-hydroxymyristroyl group N-linked 
to the proximal glucosamine residue of de-O-acylated lipid A. Substrate 
specificity for FAA II is less selective, but does require prior 
de-N-acylation of the proximal sugar, i.e. the bis-N-acylated lipid A 
is not a substrate. We have synthesized a 14C-labeled substrate analog 
for FAA II, and used this in a novel assay to monitor its purification. 
Inhibitory studies indicate that FAA II is not a serine protease but may 
have a catalytic mechanism similar to metalloprotein de-N-acetylases 
such as LpxC. Interestingly, Rhizobial Nod factor signal oligosaccharides 
that induce root nodules on leguminous plants have many of the structural
 requirements for substrate recognition by FAA II. In vitro evidence 
indicate that R. fredii Nod factors are selectively de-N-acylated by 
purified FAA II suggesting that the enzyme may reduce the N2-fixing 
efficiency of Rhizobium-legume symbioses. In contrast, N-methylated 
Nod factors from transgenic R. fredii carrying the rhizobial nodS 
gene were resistant to FAA II, suggesting a mechanism by which Nod 
factors may be protected from enzymatic de-N-acylation. Since FAA II 
and Nod factors are both secreted, and Nod factors that lack the N-acyl 
group are unable to induce nodules, dictyostelial FAA II may decrease 
the efficiency of symbiotic nitrogen fixation in the environment by 
reducing the available biologically active nodule inducer signal.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 10, number 1]

