Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 10, number 8
March 21, 1998

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

===========
 Abstracts
===========
 
UGUS, A REPORTER FOR USE WITH DESTABILIZING N-TERMINI.

Davide Zaccaria, Roberta Greco, Harry MacWilliams§, Salvatore 
Bozzaro, and Adriano Ceccarelli*.

Dipartimento di Scienze Cliniche e Biologiche - Universita' di Torino,
Ospedale S.Luigi, 10043 Orbassano (Italy), and
§ Zoologisches Institut, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat, Luisenstrasse 
14, 80333 Muenchen (Germany)
*To whom correspondence should be sent

ABSTRACT

Due to constraints in vector construction, reporter polypeptides often
carry N-terminal sequences of extraneous origin. Since protein half-life
can be influenced by small determinants in the N-terminus, such foreign
sequences can destabilize proteins and compromise results of reporter-
based studies. We provide a real-life example of this problem 
(destabilizing sequences derived from a ribosomal protein) and show 
that it can be solved with the ubiquitin fusion technique, in which 
ubiquitin sequences are placed upstream of the reporter, in our case 
beta-glucuronidase.  Post-translational processing by characterized 
pathways removes the ubiquitin together with destabilizing sequences, 
generating a stable reporter whose N-terminus is constant.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
An intersection of the cAMP/PKA and two-component signal transduction
systems in Dictyostelium

Peter A. Thomason1, David Traynor1, Guy Cavet* Wen-Tsan Chang2, Adrian J.
Harwood* and Robert R. Kay

MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 2QH,
England

EMBO J in press
			
Summary:

   Terminal differentiation of both stalk and spore cells in 
Dictyostelium can be triggered by activation of cAMP-dependent protein 
kinase (PKA).  A screen for mutants where stalk and spore cells 
mature in isolation produced three genes which may act as negative 
regulators of PKA: rdeC (encoding the PKA regulatory subunit), regA 
and rdeA.  The biochemical properties of RegA were studied in detail.  
One domain is a cAMP phosphodiesterase (Km ~5 micro-Molar).  The other 
domain is homologous to response regulators of two-component signal 
transduction systems.  It can accept phosphate from acetyl phosphate 
in a reaction typical of response regulators, with transfer dependent 
on Asp212, the predicted phospho-acceptor.  RegA phosphodiesterase 
activity is stimulated up to 8-fold by the phospho-donor phosphoramidate,
with stimulation again dependent on Asp212.  This indicates that 
phosphorylation of the response regulator domain activates the 
phosphodiesterase domain.  Over-expression of the response regulator
domain in wild-type cells phenocopies a regA null.  We interpret this
dominant negative effect as due to a diversion of the normal flow of
phosphates from RegA, thus preventing its activation.  Mutation of rdeA
is known to produce elevated cAMP levels.  We propose that cAMP 
breakdown is controlled by a phospho-relay system which activates RegA, 
and may include RdeA.  Cell maturation should be triggered when this 
system is inhibited.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Evidence that the RDEA protein is a component of a 
multistep phosphorelay modulating rate of development in 
Dictyostelium

Wen-Tsan Chang, Peter A. Thomason*, Julian D. Gross and 
Peter C. Newell

Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford 
OX1 3QU, U.K.  and (*) MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, 
Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 2QH, U.K.

EMBO J. in press.

We have isolated an insertional mutant of Dictyostelium 
discoideum that aggregated rapidly and formed spores and 
stalk cells within 14 hours of development instead of the 
normal 24 hours. We have shown by parasexual genetics that 
the insertion is in the rdeA locus and have cloned the 
gene.  It  encodes a predicted 28-kD protein (RDEA) that is 
enriched in charged residues and is very hydrophilic.  
Constructs with the DNA for the C-myc epitope or for the 
green fluorescent protein indicate that RDEA is not 
compartmentalised.  RDEA displays homology around a 
histidine residue at amino acid 65 with members of the 
H2-module family of phosphotransferases that participate in 
multistep phosphoryl relays.  Replacement of this histidine 
rendered the protein inactive. The mutant is complemented 
by transformation with the YPD1 gene of S. cerevisiae, 
itself an H2-module protein. We propose that RDEA is part 
of a multistep phosphorelay system that modulates the rate 
of development.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Rules for the addition of O-linked N-acetylglucosamine to secreted proteins
in Dictyostelium discoideum: In vivo studies on glycosylation of mucin MUC1
and MUC2 repeats

Eva JUNG, Andrew A. GOOLEY, Nicolle H. PACKER, Peter KARUSO and Keith L.
WILLIAMS

MUCAB (Macquarie University Centre for Analytical Biotechnology),
School of Biological Sciences and School of Chemistry, Macquarie
University, Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia

Eur. J. Biochem., in press

One class of O-glycosylation in the simple eukaryote Dictyostelium 
discoideum involves the addition of a single N-acetylglucosamine to 
serine and threonine residues on secreted or membrane bound proteins 
at an early stage of development. A previously developed in vivo approach 
for the identification of acceptor sites for O-glycosylation was used to 
further characterise the specificity of the UDP-GlcNAc: polypeptide 
N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase(s). Glutathione-S-transferase fusion 
proteins were constructed to express and secrete the mucin peptide repeat 
for MUC1 (PDT1RPAPGS1T2APPAHGVT3S2A) and a MUC2-like peptide 
(PT1T2T3PIT4T5T6T7T8T9VT10PT11PT12PT13GT14QT15), respectively.
Monosaccharide analysis, electrospray-ionisation mass spectrometry and
protein sequencing showed that the modification is a single
N-acetylglucosamine attached to certain threonine residues. The MUC1 repeat
was glycosylated on T2 and T3 and there were no modifications on T1 or on
S1 and S2. The MUC2 glycopeptide was glycosylated on T1, T3, T5, T7, T9,
T10, T11, T12, T13 and T14. Our results show that the D. discoideum
glycosylation apparatus incorporates GlcNAc residues into peptide sequences
similar to those reported for the addition of GalNAc residues in mammalian
tissues. The anomeric linkage of the GlcNAc residues to the polypeptide
chain was shown to be in alpha configuration as determined by NMR studies

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 10, number 8]

