Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 10, number 12
April 25, 1998

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

===========
 Abstracts
===========
 
A Developmentally Regulated Kinesin-Related Motor Protein from
Dictyostelium discoideum

Eugenio L. de Hostos1*, Gretchen McCaffrey2#, Richard Sucgang4, 
Daniel W. Pierce2, and Ronald D. Vale2,3

1Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Rice University, 
Houston TX 77005 
2Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology and 
3Howard Hughes Medical Institute , University of California, San 
Francisco, CA 94143 
4Department of Biochemistry, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston 
TX 77030

Mol. Biol. Cell, in press.

ABSTRACT

   The cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum is an attractive
system for studying the roles of microtubule-based motility in cell
development and differentiation. In this work, we report the first
molecular characterization of kinesin-related proteins in Dictyostelium. 
A PCR-based strategy was used to isolate DNA fragments encoding six
kinesin-related proteins (KRPs), several of which are induced during the
developmental program that is initiated by starvation. The complete
sequence of one such developmentally regulated KRP (designated K7) was
determined and found to be a novel member of the kinesin superfamily. 
The motor domain of K7 is most similar to that of conventional kinesin, 
but unlike conventional kinesin, K7 is not predicted to have an extensive
a-helical coiled-coil domain. The non-motor domain is unusual and is rich
in Asn, Gln, and Thr residues; similar sequences are found in other
developmentally regulated genes in Dictyostelium. K7, expressed in E. 
coli, supports plus-end directed microtubule motility in vitro at a speed
of 0.14 µm/sec, indicating that it is a bona fide motor protein. The K7 
motor is found only in developing cells and reaches a peak level of 
expression between 12 and 16 hr after starvation. By immunofluorescence 
microscopy, K7 localizes to a membranous perinuclear structure. To 
examine K7 function, we prepared a null cell line, but found that these 
cells show no gross developmental abnormalities. However, when cultivated
in the presence of wild-type cells, the K7-null cells are mostly absent 
from the pre-stalk zone of the slug. This result suggests that in a 
population composed largely of wild-type cells, the absence of the K7 
motor protein interferes either with the ability of the cells to localize
to the pre-stalk zone or to differentiate into pre-stalk cells.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Fatty acids induce release of Ca2+ from acidosomal stores and activate
capacitative Ca2+-entry in Dictyostelium discoideum

Ralph Schaloske, Jürgen Sonnemann, Dieter Malchow and Christina Schlatterer
Fakultät für Biologie, Universität Konstanz, D-78457 Konstanz

Biochemical Journal, in press

Summary

   cAMP-induced Ca2+-fluxes in Dictyostelium discoideum largely depend 
on phospholipase A2 activity generating free fatty acids (Schaloske, 
R. and Malchow, D. (1997) Biochem. J. 327:233-238). In the present 
study the effect of fatty acids on the Ca2+-homeostasis of Dictyostelium 
discoideum was investigated. [Ca2+]i was analyzed by digital imaging 
of single fura2-dextran-loaded cells. Arachidonic and linoleic acid 
induced a transient change in [Ca2+]i. The concentration of arachidonic 
acid determined the percentage of responding cells with the mean 
height of the increase being dose-independent. In nominally Ca2+-free 
medium or in the presence of BAPTA the [Ca2+]i-transient was not 
detectable. In spite of this, we found that 1. arachidonic acid 
induced Ca2+-release from permeabilized cells and from vesicular 
fractions at concentrations that elicited Ca2+-influx in intact cells 
and 2. that Ca2+-entry was inhibited by inhibitors of Ca2+-transport 
ATPases and V-type H+-ATPase indicating that intracellular Ca2+-release 
precedes Ca2+-entry. Inhibition studies and mutant analyses point to the 
acidosomal Ca2+-stores to be a target of fatty acids. Although fatty 
acids can fully substitute for cAMP with respect to Ca2+-influx in 
wildtype cells, experiments with a mutant strain revealed that cAMP 
additionally sensitizes the Ca2+-entry mechanism: cAMP-induced Ca2+-
influx was normal in a knockout mutant of phospholipase C but influx
was fairly insensitive to arachidonic acid in this strain. This defect 
could be overcome by higher doses of arachidonic acid that cause more 
Ca2+ to be released from the stores sufficient to trigger extracellular 
Ca2+-entry.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Actomyosin Cytoskeleton of Amoebae of the Cellular Slime Molds 
Acrasis rosea and Protostelium mycophaga: Structure, Biochemical 
Properties, and Function.

Maarit Hellstén and Urs-Peter Roos, Institut für Pflanzenbiologie,
Universität Zürich, Zollikerstrasse 107, CH-8008 Zürich, Switzerland

Fungal Genetics and Biology (Special Issue on Fungal Architecture), 
in press

ABSTRACT

   Amoebae of the cellular slime molds (mycetozoans) Acrasis rosea and
Protostelium mycophaga move 3-6 times faster than those of Dictyostelium
discoideum and their mode of pseudopod formation is different. In both
species there are bundles of F-actin that radiate from the
endoplasm-ectoplasm interface into the pseudopodia, where G-actin is also
located. We conclude that these actin bundles form a core scaffold 
driving pseudopod extension which is subsequently completed by filling 
with a more loosely organized meshwork of F-actin. Some bipolar, 
elongate amoebae of A. rosea also contained long bundles of F-actin 
that traverse the cells lengthwise and remotely resemble stress fibers. 
We also observed scattered rodlets of F-actin in the body of amoebae of 
A. rosea, some of which formed star-shaped or polygonal complexes near 
or around contractile vacuoles. These may play a role in vacuole 
contraction. In total extracts prepared by the TCA-acetone procedure 
and analyzed by SDS-PAGE and immunoblots the actins of the two slime 
molds migrated like the rabbit skeletal muscle control. The relative 
proportion of actin in total protein extracts was 7.9% for A. rosea 
and 34.5% for P. mycophaga. We detected 4-5 isoactins in extracts of 
both species and we determined that the genome of each species contains 
approximately six actin genes. Whether they are all expressed or
if post-translational modifications occur remains to be determined. 
Myosin II was enriched in actomyosin extracts; its Mr was 187.8 kDa 
for A. rosea and 220.7 kDa for P. mycophaga. Cell models prepared as 
cytoskeletons insoluble in Triton X-100 ("ghosts") contained minor 
amounts of actin and myosin II compared to actomyosin extracts, but 
they were able to contract upon the addition of ATP. We conclude that 
ameobae of A. rosea and P. mycophaga contain the basic repertoire 
of molecules and mechanisms allowing pseudopod extension by actin 
polymerization and ATP-induced contraction of the cell cortex by an 
interaction between actin filaments and myosin II.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Role of PKA in Timing Developmental Events in Dictyostelium Cells

William F. Loomis

Center for Molecular Genetics, Department of Biology,
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093

Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews, in press

Abstract

   The cAMP dependent protein kinase, PKA, is dispensible for growth of
Dictyostelium cells but plays a variety of crucial roles in development.
The catalytic subunit of PKA is inhibited when associated with its
regulatory subunit but is activated when cAMP binds to the regulatory
subunit. Deletion of pkaR or over-expression of the gene encoding the
catalytic subunit, pkaC, results in constitutive activity. Development is
independent of cAMP in strains carrying these genetic alterations and
proceeds rapidly to the formation of both spores and stalk cells. 
However, morphogenesis is aberrant in these mutants. In the wild type, 
PKA activity functions in a circuit that can spontaneously generate 
pulses of cAMP necessary for long range aggregation. It is also 
essential for transcriptional activation of both prespore and prestalk 
genes during the slug stage. During culmination, PKA functions in both 
prespore and prestalk cells to regulate the relative timing of terminal 
differentiation. A positive feedback loop results in the rapid release 
of a signal peptide, SDF-2, when prestalk cells are exposed to low 
levels of SDF-2. The signal transduction pathway that mediates the 
response to SDF-2 in both prestalk and prespore cells involves the 
two-component system of DhkA and RegA. When the cAMP phosphodiesterase 
RegA is inhibited, cAMP accumulates and activates PKA leading to 
vacuolization of stalk cells and encapsulation of spores. These studies 
indicate that multiple inputs regulate PKA activity to control the 
relative timing of differentiations in Dictyostelium.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

[End Dicty News, volume 10, number 12]

