Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 10, number 11
April 18, 1998

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

===========
 Abstracts
===========
 
SKIPPER, AN LTR RETROTRANSPOSON OF DICTYOSTELIUM

Ping Leng**, David H. Klatte**, Gerald Schumann**, Jef D. Boeke, and
Theodore L. Steck

** These authors contributed equally and are considered joint first 
authors

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637
and
Dept. of Molecular Biology & Genetics, Johns Hopkins Univ. School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205

Nucleic Acids Research, in press 

Abstract

     The complete sequence of a retrotransposon from Dictyostelium 
discoideum, named skipper, was obtained from cDNA and genomic clones.  
The sequence of a nearly full-length skipper cDNA was similar to that 
of three other partially sequenced cDNAs.  The corresponding retro-
transposon is represented in about 15-20 copies and is abundantly 
transcribed.  Skipper contains three open reading frames (ORFs) with 
an unusual sequence organization, aspects of which resemble certain 
mammalian retroviruses.  ORFs 1 and 3 correspond to gag and pol genes; 
the second ORF, pro, corresponding to protease, was separated from 
gag by a single stop codon followed shortly thereafter by a potential 
pseudoknot.  ORF3 (pol) was separated from pro by a +1 frameshift.  ORFs 
2 and 3 overlapped by 32 bp.  The computed amino acid sequences of the 
skipper ORFs contain regions resembling retrotransposon polyprotein 
domains, including a nucleic acid binding protein, aspartyl protease, 
reverse transcriptase and integrase. Skipper  is the first example of a 
retrotransposon with a separate pro gene.  Skipper is also novel in 
that it appears to use stop codon suppression rather than frameshifting 
to modulate pro expression.  Finally, skipper  and its components may 
provide useful tools for the genetic characterization of Dictyostelium. 

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
A novel Myb homologue initiates Dictyostelium development by
induction of adenylyl cyclase expression  

Hideshi Otsuka and Peter J.M. Van Haastert

Department of Biochemistry, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4,
9747 AG Groningen, The Netherlands

Genes Dev., in press

ABSTRACT 

   Dictyostelium development is induced by starvation. The adenylyl
cyclase gene ACA is one of the first genes expressed upon starvation. 
ACA  produces extracellular cAMP that induces chemotaxis, aggregation
and differentiation in neighbouring cells. Using insertional
mutagenesis we have isolated a mutant that does not aggregate upon
starvation but is rescued by adding extracellular cAMP. Sequencing of
the mutated locus revealed a new gene, DdMYB2, whose product contains
three Myb repeats, the DNA-binding motif of Myb-related transcription
factors. Ddmyb2-null cells show undetectable levels of ACA transcript
and no cAMP production. Ectopic expression of ACA from a constitutive
promotor rescues differentiation and morphogenesis of Ddmyb2-null
mutant. The results suggest that development in Dictyostelium starts
by starvation-mediated DdMyb2 activation, which induces adenylyl
cyclase activity producing the differentiation-inducing signal cAMP.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

In Vitro Microtubule-based Organelle Transport in Wild-Type 
Dictyostelium and Cells Overexpressing a Truncated Dynein Heavy Chain

Nira Pollock(1), Michael P. Koonce(3), Eugenio L. de Hostos(4), and 
Ronald D. Vale(2,1) 

(1)Dept. of Pharmacology and (2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143; 
(3)Division of Molecular Medicine, Wadsworth Center, Empire State 
Plaza, Albany, New York 12201-0509; and (4)Department of Biochemistry 
and Cell Biology, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005-1892.

Cell Motil. Cytoskel., in press

Abstract

   The transport of vesicular organelles along microtubules has been
well documented in a variety of systems, but the molecular mechanisms
underlying this process are not well understood.  We have developed a
method for preparing extracts from Dictyostelium discoideum which 
support high levels of bidirectional, microtubule-based vesicle transport 
in vitro. This organelle transport assay was also adapted to observe 
specifically the motility of vesicles in the endocytic pathway.  Vesicle 
transport can be reconstituted by recombining a high-speed supernatant 
with KI-washed organelles, which do not move in the absence of 
supernatant.  Furthermore, a microtubule affinity -purified motor 
fraction supports robust bidirectional movement of the salt-washed 
organelles.  The plus and minus end-directed transport activities can
be separated by exploiting differences in their affinities for 
microtubules in the presence of 0.3 M KCl.  We also used our assay to 
examine organelle transport in a strain of Dictyostelium overexpressing 
a 380-kDa carboxy-terminal fragment of the cytoplasmic dynein heavy 
chain, which displays an altered microtubule pattern (380-kDa cells; 
Koonce and Samso, Mol. Biol. Cell, 7: 935-948, 1996).  We have found 
that the frequency and velocity of minus end-directed membrane organelle 
movements were significantly reduced in 380-kDa cells relative to wild-
type cells, while the frequency and velocity of plus end-directed 
movements were equivalent in the two cell types.  The 380-kDa
carboxy-terminal fragment cosedimented with membrane organelles, 
although its affinity was significantly lower than that of native 
dynein.  An impaired membrane-microtubule interaction may be responsible 
for the altered microtubule patterns in the 380-kDa cells. 

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Conditional Loss of Myosin-II Function Mutants Reveal a Position in the 
Tail that is Critical for Filament Nucleation

Sheri L. Moores and James A. Spudich

Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University School of Medicine
Stanford, CA 94305

Molecular Cell, in press

Summary

Myosin-II must be assembled into filaments to perform its cellular
functions.  Two conditional loss of myosin-II function mutants were
recovered from a genetic screen (Patterson and Spudich, 1995) with 
defects that were mapped to the coiled coil tail region of Dictyostelium 
myosin-II.  Strikingly, both tail mutations affected the same arginine 
residue at position 1880.  A single amino acid substitution, R1880P, 
disrupted both the dimerization and tetramerization steps of filament 
nucleation.  Even a single charge reversal at this position, R1880D, 
was sufficient to inhibit filament assembly, while other single charge 
reversals in the region of antiparallel contact suppressed these 
filament assembly mutants.  The considerable impact of small 
electrostatic forces on nucleation suggests that these steps are 
delicately balanced.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

EXPRESSION OF STARVATION-INDUCED GENES
IN ZYGOTES OF Dictyostelium discoideum

MIHO IIJIMA, KAZUHIRO AIBA*, YOSHIMASA TANAKA 
and HIDEKO URUSHIHARA

INSTITUTE OF BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES
UNIVERSITY OF TSUKUBA
TSUKUBA-SHI, IBARAKI 305 JAPAN

* Present address: Doi Bioassymmetry Project, ERATO, JST, Tsukuba 
Research Consortium, Tsukuba-shi, Ibaraki 300-26, Japan 

Journal of Plant Research, in press.

ABSTRACT

   Two cDNA fragments induced in developing zygotes of Dictyostelium 
discoideum were isolated by mRNA differential display. The relevant 
genes were also found to be expressed during asexual development, 
suggesting that sexual and asexual development share common molecular 
mechanisms in D. discoideum.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

A Dictyostelium discoideum homologue to Tcp-1 is essential for 
growth and development

Miho Iijima, Hajime Shimizua, Yoshimasa Tanaka and Hideko 
Urushihara*

Institute of Biological Sciences, University of Tsukuba 
Tsukuba-shi, 305-8572, JAPAN

*Address for correspondence: Institute of Biological Sciences, 305-8572 
Japan;  TEL. +81-298-53-4664; FAX. +81-298-53-6614; e-mail: 
d402hu@sakura.cc.tsukuba.ac.jp

GENE, in press.

Abstract

     Tcp-1 (t-complex polypeptide 1 gene) was first identified in the 
mouse as relevant for tail-less and embryonic lethal phenotypes. Since 
then, its homologous sequences have been isolated in several other 
species, and the yeast Tcp-1 has been shown to encode a molecular 
chaperon for actin and tubulin. In a random sample of genes expressed 
in the gamete of Dictyostelium discoideum (Dd), we encountered a sequence
containing the TCP1 motifs. The complete ORF of the gene (DdTcp-1) showed
more than 60% similarity to TCP-1 of several organisms including human. 
DdTcp-1 was found to be expressed in both sexually mature and immature 
cells at the growth phase. Although the sexual process itself was not 
affected, antisense interference of this gene resulted in severe 
retardation of cell growth, leading to the complete cessation of 
division. In addition, the antisense transformants stopped asexual 
development at the finger stage. These results suggest an important 
function of DdTcp-1 in growth and development of this organism. 

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Microtubule mediated centrosome motility and the positioning of 
cleavage furrows in multinucleate myosin II-null cells

Ralph Neujahr, Richard Albrecht, Jana Köhler, Monika Matzner, 
Jean-Marc Schwartz, Monika Westphal, and Günther Gerisch

Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie
D-82152 Martinsried, Germany

J. Cell Science, in press.

Summary

To study centrosome motility and the interaction of microtubules with the
cell cortex in mitotic, post-mitotic and interphase cells, a-tubulin was
tagged in Dictyostelium discoideum with GFP. Multinucleate cells formed by
myosin II-null mutants proved to be especially suited for the analysis of
the control of cleavage furrow formation by the microtubule system. After
docking of the mitotic apparatus onto the cell cortex during anaphase, the
cell surface is activated to form ruffles on top of the asters of
microtubules that emanate from the centrosomes. Cleavage furrows are
initiated at spaces between the asters independent of the positions of
spindles. Once initiated, the furrows expand as deep folds without a
continued connection to the microtubule system. Occurrence of unilateral
furrows indicates that a closed contractile ring is dispensable for
cytokinesis in Dictyostelium. The progression of cytokinesis in the
multinucleate cells underlines the importance of proteins other than myosin
II in specifying a cleavage furrow. The analysis of centrosome motility
suggests a major role for a minus-end directed motor protein, probably
cytoplasmic dynein, in applying traction forces on guiding microtubules
that connect the centrosome with the cell cortex. 

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dictyostelium discoideum cells shed vesicles with associated DNA 
and vital stain Hoechst 33342
I. Tatischeff(a)*, M. Bomsel(b), C. de Paillerets(c), H. Durand(b), 
B. Geny(b), D. Segretain(d), E. Turpin(b) and A. Alfsen(c)

(a) : Laboratoire de Physicochimie Biomoléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS URA
2056, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 4, Place Jussieu, Case 138,F-75252
Paris Cedex 05, France. e-mail: tati@lpbc.jussieu.fr
(b) : Signalisation, Inflammation et Transformation Cellulaire, U. 332,
Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, 22, rue Méchain,F-75014 Paris,
France
© : Etats Liés Moléculaires, Université René Descartes, 45, rue des
Saints-Pères,F-75270 Paris Cedex 06, France
(d) : Laboratoire d'Histologie et Embryologie, CHU Paris-Ouest, Faculté de
Médecine, 45, rue des Saints-Pères,F-75270 Paris Cedex 06, France

Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences, in press.

Abstract

   Dictyostelium discoideum cells are highly resistant to xenobiotics. 
We previously observed that these primitive eukaryotic cells contain a 
170 kDa P-glycoprotein, mediating multidrug resistance in mammalian 
cells, but non-functional in Dictyostelium cells. We show here that 
Dictyostelium discoideum cells vitally stained with the DNA-specific 
dye, Hoechst 33342, release fluorescent material in their culture 
medium. Electron microscopy and lipid analysis demonstrate the 
vesicular nature of this material.  Moreover, nucleic acids associate 
with these extracellular vesicles independently of Hoechst vital 
staining. The main vesicular DNA component exhibits a size >21 kb. 
Shedding of microvesicles during cell growth is not concomitant to 
programmed cell death. We propose that these extracellular vesicles 
are involved in a new cellular resistance mechanism against xenobiotics. 
Furthermore, since the association of DNA with vesicles occurs in 
physiological growth conditions and independently of vital staining, 
the new shedding process might be involved in a more general intercellular 
mechanism.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 10, number 11]

