Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 10, number 14
June 6, 1998

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

===========
 Abstracts
===========
 

A rapid, small scale method for characterization of plasmid
insertions in the Dictyostelium genome

C. BARTH, D.J. FRASER AND P.R. FISHER

School of Microbiology, La Trobe University, Bundoora 3083, Melbourne, 
Australia

Nucleic Acids Research. In Press.

Summary

   A rapid, simple method for characterization of plasmid insertions 
in the  Dictyostelium discoideum genome was developed. It is based on 
the capability of linear plasmid multimers in the insertions to 
recircularize efficiently in Escherichia coli cells. This recombinational 
recircularization of plasmid multimers provides a highly sensitive and 
reliable tool for determining whether individual Dictyostelium transformants 
resulted from restriction enzyme-mediated integration (REMI) or from 
recombinational integration of plasmid (RIP). The method also reveals 
any rearrangements in RIP insertions and provides an estimate of the 
vector copy number in any particular transformant.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Two Proteins of the Dictyostelium Spore Coat Bind to Cellulose 
in vitro

Yunyan Zhang, Ross D. Brown, Jr., and Christopher M. West

Department of Anatomy & Cell Biology, University of Florida College 
of Medicine, and Food Science and Human Nutrition Department, 
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, Gainesville, FL  32610  USA

Biochemistry, in press


Summary:

   The spore coat of Dictyostelium contains nine different proteins and 
cellulose.  Interactions between protein and cellulose were investigated 
using an in vitro binding assay. Proteins extracted from coats with urea 
and 2-mercaptoethanol could, after removal of urea by gel filtration, 
efficiently bind to particles of cellulose (Avicel), but not Sephadex or 
Sepharose. Two proteins, SP85 and SP35, were enriched in the reconstitution, 
and retained their cellulose binding activities after purification by ion 
exchange chromatography under denaturing conditions to suppress protein-protein 
interactions. Neither protein exhibited cellulase activity, though under certain 
conditions SP85 copurified with a cellulase activity which appeared after 
germination.  Amino acid sequencing indicated that SP85 and SP35 are encoded 
by the previously described pspB and psvA genes. This was confirmed for SP85 
by showing that natural Mr polymorphisms correlated with changes in the number 
of tetrapeptide-encoding sequence repeats in pspB. Using PCR to reconstruct 
missing elements from the recombinogenic middle region of pspB, SP85 was shown 
to consist of three sequence domains separated by two groups of the tetrapeptide 
repeats. Expression of partial pspB cDNAs in E. coli showed that cellulose-
binding activity resided in the Cys-rich COOH-terminal domain of SP85. This 
cellulose-binding activity can explain SP85’s ultrastructural colocalization 
with cellulose in vivo. Amino acid composition and antibody binding data showed 
that SP35 is derived from the Cys-rich N-terminal region of the previously 
described psvA protein. SP85 and SP35 may link other proteins to cellulose 
during coat assembly and germination.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Cytoplasmic F-box Binding Protein SKP1 Contains a Novel Pentasaccharide 
Linked to Hydroxyproline in Dictyostelium

Patana Teng-umnuay, Howard R. Morris, Anne Dell, Maria Panico, Thanai Paxton,
and Christopher M. West

Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, Florida  32610-0235, USA; Department of Biochemistry, Imperial College, 
London SW7 2AY, UK 

J. Biol. Chem., in press.

Summary:

   SKP1 is involved in the ubiquitination of certain cell cycle and nutritional 
regulatory proteins for rapid turnover. SKP1 from Dictyostelium has been known 
to be modified by an oligosaccharide containing Fuc and Gal, which is unusual 
for a cytoplasmic or nuclear protein. To establish how it is glycosylated, SKP1 
labeled with [3H]Fuc was purified to homogeneity and digested with endo-Lys-C. A 
single radioactive peptide was found after 2-dimensional HPLC. Analysis in a Q-TOF 
mass spectrometer revealed a predominant ion with a novel mass. MS/MS analysis 
yielded a set of daughter ions which identified the peptide and showed that it was 
modified at Pro143. A second series of daughter ions showed that Pro143 was 
hydroxylated and derivatized with a potentially linear pentasaccharide, Hex-Hex-Fuc-
Hex-HexNAc-(HyPro). The attachment site was confirmed by Edman degradation. GC-MS 
analysis of TMS-derivatives of overexpressed SKP1 after methanolysis showed the 
HexNAc to be GlcNAc. Exoglycosidase digestions of the glycopeptide from normal 
SKP1 and from a fucosylation mutant, followed by MALDI-TOF-MS analysis, showed 
that the sugar chain consisted of D-Galpalpha1,6-D-Galpalpha1,L-Fucpalpha1,2-D-
Galpbeta1,3GlcNAc. MALDI-TOF-MS analysis of all SKP1 peptides resolved by RP-HPLC 
showed that SKP1 was only partially hydroxylated at Pro143, and that all hydroxylated 
SKP1 was completely glycosylated. Thus SKP1 is variably modified by an unusual linear 
pentasaccharide, suggesting the localization of a novel glycosylation pathway in the 
cytoplasm. 

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

G-protein beta-subunit null mutants are impaired in phagocytosis and
chemotaxis due to inappropriate regulation of the actin cytoskeleton

Barbara Peracino, Jane Borleis*, Tian Jin*,  Monika Westphal#, Jean-Marc
Schwartz#, Lijun Wu°, Enrico Bracco, Günther Gerisch#, Peter Devreotes* and
Salvatore BozzaroÝ

J. Cell Biology, in press

ABSTRACT

   Chemotaxis and phagocytosis are basically similar in cells of the  immune
system and in Dictyostelium amoebae. Deletion of the unique G-protein
beta-subunit in D. discoideum impaired phagocytosis but had little effect
on fluid-phase endocytosis, cytokinesis or random motility. Constitutive
expression of wild-type beta-subunit restored phagocytosis and normal
development. Chemoattractants, released by cells or bacteria, trigger
typical transient actin polymerization responses in wild-type cells. In
beta-subunit null cells, and in a series of beta subunit point mutants,
these responses were impaired to a degree that correlated with the defect
in phagocytosis. Image analysis of GFP-actin transfected cells showed that
beta-subunit null cells were defective in re-shaping the actin network into
a phagocytic cup, and eventually a phagosome, in response to particle
attachment. Our results indicate that signalling through heterotrimeric G
proteins is required for regulating the actin cytoskeleton during phagocytic 
uptake, as previously shown for chemotaxis. Inhibitors of phopholipase C 
and intracellular Ca2+ mobilization inhibit phagocytosis, suggesting the 
possible involvement of these effectors in the process.


-------------------------------------------------------------------------

[End Dicty News, volume 10, number 14]

