Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 10, number 6
February 22, 1998

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

===========
 Abstracts
===========
 
The Hybrid Histidine Kinase dhkB Regulates Spore Germination in
Dictyostelium discoideum 

Michael J. Zinda and Charles K. Singleton

Vanderbilt University

Developmental Biology, in press

Spore germination is a defined developmental process that marks a 
critical point in the life cycle of Dictyostelium discoideum.  Upon 
germination the environmental conditions must be conducive to cell 
growth to ensure survival of emerged amoebae.  However, the signal 
transduction pathways controlling the various aspects of spore 
germination in large part remain to be elucidated.  We have used 
degenerate PCR to identify dhkB, a two-component histidine kinase, 
from Dictyostelium discoideum.   dhkB is predicted to be a transmembrane 
hybrid sensor kinase. The dhkB null cells develop with normal timing 
to give what seem to be mature fruiting bodies by 22 to 24 hours.  
However over the next several hours, the ellipsoidal and encapsulated 
spores proceed to swell and germinate in situ within the sorus and 
thus do not respond to the normal inhibitors of germination present 
within the sorus.  The emerged amoebae dehydrate due to the high
osmolarity within the sorus, and by 72 hours 4% or less of the amoebae
remain as spores while most cells are now nonviable.  Precocious
germination is suppressed by ectopic activation of or expression of
cAMP-dependent protein kinase A.  Additionally, at 24 hours the
intracellular concentration of cAMP of dhkB- spores is 40% that of dhkB+
spores.  The results indicate that DHKB regulates spore germination, and 
a functional DHKB sensor kinase is required for the maintenance of spore
dormancy.   DHKB probably acts by maintaining an active PKA that in turn 
is inhibitory to germination.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Chemotactic and osmotic signals share a cGMP transduction 
pathway in Dictyostelium discoideum

Hidekazu Kuwayama and Peter J.M. Van Haastert

Department of Biochemistry, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4,
9747 AG Groningen, The Netherlands

FEBS Letters, in press

In the ameboid eukaryote Dictyostelium discoideum, chemotactic
stimulation by cAMP induces an increase of intracellular cGMP and
subsequently the  phosphorylation of myosin heavy chain II.
Resistance to high osmotic stress also requires transient increases
of intracellular cGMP and phosphorylation of myosin heavy chain II,
although the kinetics is much slower than for chemotaxis. To examine
if chemotaxis and osmotic stress share common signalling components
we systematically analyzed the osmotic cGMP response and survival in
chemotactic mutants with altered cGMP signaling. Null-mutants with
deletions of cell surface cAMP receptors or the associated
GTP-binding proteins G 2 and G  show no cAMP-induced cGMP response
and chemotaxis; in contrast, osmotic stress induces the normal cGMP
accumulation and survival. The same result was obtained with the
non-chemotactic mutant KI-10, which lacks the activation of guanylyl
cyclase by cAMP. This indicates that these components are required
for chemotaxis but not osmotic cGMP signaling and survival. The
potential guanylyl cyclase null mutant KI-8 shows no chemotaxis, no
osmotic cGMP increase and reduced survival in high osmolarity. Two
types of cGMP-binding protein mutants, KI-4 and KI-7, also show
reduced torelance during high osmotic stress. Taken together, these
observations clarify that chemotactic and osmotic signals are
detected by different mechanisms, but share a cGMP signaling pathway.
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Use of a fusion protein between GFP and an actin binding domain to
visualize transient F-actin structures associated with cell motility 
and surface adherence.

Ka Ming Pang, Eunkyung Lee and David A. Knecht

Department of Molecular and Cell Biology,University of Connecticut,
Storrs, CT 06269,USA

Current Biology in press

Abstract

   Many important cellular processes involve changes in the quantity,
location and the organization of actin filaments.  We have constructed a
green fluorescent protein-actin binding domain fusion protein (GFP-ABD)
which allows the visualization of these changes in live cells.  GFP was
fused to the N-terminus of the 25kD highly conserved actin binding 
domain from the actin cross-linking protein ABP-120.  In live 
Dictyostelium cells expressing GFP-ABD, the three dimensional 
architecture of the actin cortex was clearly visualized.  The 
fluorescence pattern of GFP-ABD coincides with that of rhodamine-
phalloidin indicating that this probe specifically binds
F-actin in cells.   On the ventral surface of non-polarized vegetative
cells, a broad ring of actin was periodically assembled and then
contracted. In polarized cells transient punctate F-actin structures 
were evident.  Cells cycled between these two morphologies.  During 
pseudopod formation, an increase in fluorescence intensity coincided 
with the initial outward deformation of the membrane. This is 
consistent with the models of pseudopod extension that predict 
an increase in local filament density.  This GFP probe specifically 
binds F-actin and allows the visualization of F-actin dynamics and 
cellular behavior simultaneously.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Formation of F-actin aggregates in cells treated with actin 
stabilizing drugs

Eunkyung Lee, Eric A.  Shelden and David A. Knecht

Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut
Storrs, CT 06269

Cell Motil. Cytoskel., January 1998

ABSTRACT

   We have electroporated Dictyostelium amoebae with fluorescent 
phalloidin in order to visualize the localization and behavior of 
F-actin filaments in living cells.  Immediately after electroporation 
with phalloidin, cells became round and showed bright staining in the 
cortical region.  Over time, the cortical staining disappeared and 
was replaced by a large aggregate of actin filaments.  The aggregates 
were predominantly localized to the apical posterior of actively 
moving cells, and in the middle of dividing cells or stationary AX4 
cells.  Mutants lacking myosin II or ABP-120 also formed actin 
aggregates, however the rate of formation of aggregates was slower 
in myosin II mutant cells. In order to further investigate this 
phenomenon, we have used jasplakinolide, a membrane permeable drug 
that also stabilizes F-actin filaments.  Cells treated with 
jasplakinolide formed actin aggregates in a concentration dependent 
manner.  Drug treatment led to an increase in the proportion of 
actin associated with the cytoskeleton.  Jasplakinolide treated 
cells were still motile, however their rate of movement was less 
than that of untreated cells.  Cytochalasin B and nocodazole had 
inhibitory effects on aggregate formation, while azide blocked 
the process completely.  We hypothesize that aggregates are formed 
from the cortical flow of F-actin filaments.  These filaments would 
normally be depolymerized, but are artificially stabilized by 
phalloidin or jasplakinolide binding.  The localization of the 
aggregate is likely to be an indication of the direction of cortical 
flow. 

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

A Role for Dictyostelium racE in Cortical Tension and Cleavage 
Furrow Progression

Noel Gerald(1), Jianwu Dai(1), H. Ping Ting-Beall(2) and Arturo De Lozanne(1*)

1Department of Cell Biology, box 3709, Duke University Medical Center
Durham, NC 27710

2Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science
Duke University, Durham, NC 27708

*To whom correspondence should be addressed: phone (919) 681-6851
fax (919) 681-7978, email: a.delozanne@cellbio.duke.edu

J. Cell Biol., in press.

ABSTRACT
   The small GTPase racE is essential for cytokinesis in Dictyostelium.  
We found that this requirement is restricted to cells grown in 
suspension.  When attached to a substrate, racE null cells form 
an actomyosin contractile ring and complete cytokinesis normally.  
Nonetheless, racE null cells fail completely in cytokinesis when in 
suspension.  To understand this conditional requirement for racE, 
we developed a method to observe cytokinesis in suspension.  Using 
this approach we found that racE null cells attempt cytokinesis in 
suspension by forming a contractile ring and cleavage furrow.  However, 
the cells form multiple blebs and fail in cytokinesis by regression 
of the cleavage furrow.  We believe this phenotype is caused by the 
extremely low level of cortical tension found in racE null cells 
compared to wild-type cells.  The reduced cortical tension of racE 
null cells is not caused by a decrease in their content of F-actin.  
Instead, mitotic racE null cells contain abnormal F-actin aggregates.  
These results suggest that racE is essential for the organization of 
the cortical cytoskeleton to maintain proper cortical integrity.  This 
function of racE is independent of attachment to a substrate but can 
be bypassed by other signaling pathways induced by adhesion to a 
substrate.  

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 10, number 6]

