Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 10, number 4
February 7, 1998

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

===========
 Abstracts
===========

DdLIM is a Cytoskeleton-associated Protein Involved in the 
Protrusion of Lamellipodia in Dictyostelium

Josef Prassler, Alexander Murr, Susanne Stocker, Jan Faix, John 
Murphy, and Gerard Marriott

Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany

Mol. Biol. Cell, in press

Abstract:

   DdLim, a multi-domain member of the cysteine rich family of LIM 
domain proteins, was isolated from Dictyostelium cells where it 
localizes in lamellipodia and at sites of membrane ruffling. The 
transcription and expression of DdLim is developmentally regulated 
and the timing of its increased association with the actin 
cytoskeleton coincides with the acquisition in starved cells of a 
motile, chemotactic behavior. Vegetative cells that overexpress DdLim 
contain large lamella and exhibit ruffling at the cortex. The high 
frequency of large, multi-nucleated mutant cells found in suspension 
culture suggests that excess DdLim interferes with cytokinesis. DdLim 
was also identified as a protein in a Dictyostelium cell lysate that 
associated indirectly, but in a GTP-dependent manner, with a GST-rac1 
fusion protein. The data presented suggest that DdLim acts as an
adapter protein at the cytoskeleton-membrane interface where it is 
involved in a receptor-mediated rac1 signaling pathway that leads to 
actin polymerization in lamellipodia and ultimately cell motility.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ethane-freezing/Methanol-fixation of Cell Monolayers. 
A Procedure for Improved Preservation of Structure and 
Antigenicity for Light and Electron Microscopies

Eva M. Neuhaus, Heinz Horstmann, Wolfhard Almers, Markus Maniak*, and
Thierry Soldati

Department of Molecular Cell Research, Max-Planck-Institute for Medical
Research, Jahnstrasse 29, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany

* Department of Cell Biology, Max-Planck-Institute for Biochemistry, 
D-82152 Martinsried, Germany

Journal of Structural Biology, in press

Abstract:

   In order to dissect at the ultrastructural level the morphology of 
highly dynamic processes such as cell motility, membrane trafficking 
events and organelle movements, it is necessary to fix/stop time-
dependent events in the millisecond range. Ideally, immunoelectron 
microscopical labelling experiments requires the availability of high-
affinity antibodies and accessibility to all compartments of the cell. 
The biggest challenge is to define an optimum between significant 
preservation of the antigenicity in the fixed material without 
compromising the intactness of fine structures.  Here, we present a 
procedure which offers an opportunity to unify preparation of cell 
monolayers for immunocytochemistry in fluorescence and electron 
microscopy. This novel strategy combines a rapid ethane-freezing
technique with a low temperature methanol-fixation treatment (EFMF), 
and completely avoids chemical fixatives. It preserves the position 
and delicate shape of cells and organelles and leads to improved 
accessibility of the intracellular antigens and to high antigenicity 
preservation. We illustrate the establishment of this procedure 
using Dictyostelium discoideum, a powerful model organism to study 
molecular mechanisms of membrane trafficking and cytoskeleton.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

The cAMP-dependent protein kinase of Dictyostelium : role of the
amino-terminal domain in catalytic activity and development.

DAMMANN, H. TTRAINCARD, F. ANJARD, C. Van BEMMELEN, M. REYMOND, C. and
VERON, M.

Mechanism of Development, in press

ABSTRACT

   The catalytic subunit of the cAMP dependent protein kinase (PKA) from
Dictyostelium discoideum  contains several domains including an unusually
long N-terminal extension preceding a highly conserved catalytic core. We
transformed the aggregationless PkaC-null strain with several deletion
constructs of both domains. Strains transformed with genes expressing
catalytically inactive polypeptides could not rescue development.
Cotransformation with constructs encoding the N-terminal extension and 
the catalytic core, both unable to rescue development by themselves, 
yielded transformants able to proceed to late development. A 27 amino 
acids long hydrophobic region, immediately upstream the catalytic core, 
was found indispensable for PKA function. A putative role of this 
sequence in the acquisition of the active conformation of the protein 
is discussed.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 10, number 4]

