Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 14, number 9
April 22, 2000

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

=============
  Abstracts
=============

Dictyostelium RasD is Required for Normal Phototaxis, but not
Differentiation

Andrew Wilkins, Meenal Khosla, Derek J. Fraser,George B. Spiegelman,
Paul R. Fisher, Gerald Weeks and Robert H. Insall

in press, Genes & Development

Abstract

RasD, a Dictyostelium homologue of mammalian Ras, is maximally
expressed during the multicellular stage of development.  Normal
Dictyostelium aggregates are phototactic and thermotactic, moving
towards sources of light and heat with great sensitivity.  We show
that disruption of the gene for rasD causes a near-total loss of
phototaxis and thermotaxis in mutant aggregates, without obvious
effects on undirected movement.  Previous experiments had suggested
important roles for RasD in development and cell-type determination.
Surprisingly, rasD- cells show no obvious changes in these processes.
These cells represent a novel class of phototaxis mutant, and
indicate a role for a Ras pathway in the connections between stimuli
and coordinated cell movement.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------

An Akt/PKB-related kinase activated via a cAMP-receptor dependent,
PI(3) kinase-independent pathway is required for Dictyostelium
multicellular development

Ruedi Meili, Charlene Ellsworth, and Richard A. Firtel

Current Biology, in press.

ABSTRACT

Background:  Dictyostelium Akt/PKB is homologous to mammalian Akt/PKB
and is required for cell polarity and proper chemotaxis during early
development.  Akt/PKB kinase activity is activated in response to
chemoattractants in neutrophils and in Dictyostelium by the
chemoattractant cAMP functioning via a G protein-, PI3 kinase-dependent
pathway. Dictyostelium contains several kinase structurally related to
Akt/PKB, one of which, PKBR-1, is investigated here for its role in cell
polarity, movement, and cellular morphogenesis during development.

Results: PKBR-1 has a kinase and C-terminal domain related to those of
Akt/PKB but no PH domain.  Instead, it has an N-terminal myristoylation
site, which is required for PKBR-1's constitutive membrane localization.
Like Akt/PKB, PKBR-1 is activated by cAMP through a G protein-dependent
pathway but which does not require PI3K, probably due to PKBR-1's
constitutive membrane localization, supported by experiments demonstrating
the requirement of PKBR-1's membrane association for activation and in
vivo function.  PKBR-1 protein is found in all cells through early
development but is then restricted to the apical cells in developing
aggregates, which are thought to control morphogenesis. PKBR-1 null
cells arrest development at the mound stage and are defective in
morphogenesis and multicellular development.  These phenotypes are
complemented Akt/PKB, suggesting functional overlap between PKBR-1
and Akt/PKB.  Akt/PKB:PKBR-1 double knockout cells exhibit growth
defects and show stronger chemotaxis and cell polarity defects than
Akt/PKB null cells.

Conclusions: Our results expand the previously known functions of Akt/PKB
family members in cell movement and morphogenesis during multicellular
development.  The data suggest that Akt/PKB and PKBR-1 have overlapping
effectors and biological function: Akt/PKB, functions predominantly during
aggregation to control cell polarity and chemotaxis while PKBR-1 is
required for morphogenesis during multicellular development.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Real-time high-resolution optical sectioning suggests biphasic cytokinetic
mechanism in Dictyostelium discoideum.

Yoshio Fukui

Cell and Molecular Biology, Northwestern University Medical School,
Chicago, IL 60611-3008.

In Biology of cytokinesis, (ed. Y. Fukui). Microscope Research and
Technique,
vol. 49, Number 2 (April 2000). In press.

Abstract

Despite its biological significance, much of the mechanism of cytokinesis
is not yet resolved.  The problems include: (1) signaling mechanism
determining
the position of the cleavage furrow, (2) molecular and mechanistic nature of
the contractile ring, and (3) the origin of forces responsible for cleavage.
Using high-resolution imaging technique, the present study analyzes
morphometric changes of cytokinesis in wild type (NC4) Dictyostelium
discoideum amoeba.  Sample was prepared by the agar-overlay method, creating
3 mm-thick, nearly two-dimensional cells; and high-resolution image was
acquired at 16.7 milliseconds’ temporal, 234 nm x, y-, and 100 nm z-axis
resolutions.  Under this condition, the formation of cleavage furrow
initiates
at mitotic telophase, and daughter cells separate 18-22 minutes after the
furrow initiation.  We found that the compression of cells and the room
temperature need to be carefully controlled for cytokinesis to proceed in
orderly manner.  The results demonstrate that the pole-to-pole distance
increases by 83% during the initial 5 minutes of cytokinesis, while the
distance of equator only decreases by 56%.  In contrast, during the
subsequent
5 minutes, the pole-to-pole distance only increases by 17%, while the
equator
distance decreases as much as by 44%.  This study indicates that cytokinesis
consists of at least two different phases, each of which results from
different mechanism.

Note:  This is available online at http://pubweb.nwu.edu/~yoshifk/fukui.html

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
SPATIALLY REGULATED RECRUITMENT OF CLATHRIN TO
THE PLASMA MEMBRANE DURING CAPPING AND CELL
TRANSLOCATION

Cynthia K. Damer1, and Theresa J. O'Halloran2
1 Department of Biology, Vassar College;
2 Section of Molecular Cell & Developmental Biology
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin TX

In press, Molecular Biology of the Cell

Abstract

   Clathrin coated vesicles bud from selected cellular membranes to traffic
specific intracellular proteins.  To study the dynamic properties of
clathrin coated membranes, we expressed clathrin heavy chain tagged with
green
fluorescent protein (GFP) in Dictyostelium cells.  GFP-clathrin was
functional
and retained the native properties of clathrin: the chimeric protein formed
classic clathrin lattices on cellular membranes and also rescued phenotypic
defects of clathrin null cells.  GFP-clathrin distributed into punctate loci
found throughout the cytoplasm, on the plasma membrane and concentrated to a
perinuclear location. These clathrin-coated structures were remarkably
motile,
and capable of rapid and bidirectional transport across the cell. We
identified
two local domains of the plasma membrane as sites for clathrin recruitment
in
motile cells.  First, as cells translocated or changed shape and retracted
their tails, clathrin was transiently concentrated on the membrane at the
back of the cell tail.  Secondly, as cells capped their cell surface
receptors,
clathrin was recruited locally to the membrane under the tight cap of
crosslinked receptors.  This suggests that local sites for clathrin
polymerization on specific domains of the plasma membrane undergo rapid and
dynamic regulation in motile cells.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 14, number 9]