Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 14, number 10
April 29, 2000

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

=============
  Abstracts
=============
Rac1 GTPases Control Filopodia Formation, Cell Motility, Endocytosis,
Cytokinesis, and Development in Dictyostelium

Michel Dumontier, Petra Höcht, Ursula Mintert, and Jan Faix

JCS, in press.


SUMMARY

The function of the highly homologous Rac1A, Rac1B, and Rac1C GTPases of
the Dictyostelium Rac1 group was investigated. All three GTPases bound with
an equal capacity to the IQGAP-related protein DGAP1, with a preference for
the activated GTP-bound form. Strong overexpression of wild-type Rac1
GTPases N-terminally tagged with green fluorescent protein (GFP),
predominantly induced the formation of numerous long filopodia. Remarkably,
expression of the constitutively-activated GTPases resulted in
dominant-negative phenotypes: these Rac1-V12 mutants completely lacked
filopodia but formed numerous crown shaped structures resembling
micropinosomes. Moreover, these mutants were severely impaired in cell
motility, colony growth, phagocytosis, pinocytosis, cytokinesis, and
development. Transformants expressing constitutively-inactivated Rac1-N17
proteins were similar to wild-type cells, but displayed abundant and short
filopodia and exhibited a moderate defect in cytokinesis. Taken together,
our results indicate that the three GTPases play an identical role in
signaling pathways and are key regulators of cellular activities that
depend on the re-organization of the actin cytoskeleton in Dictyostelium.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Two-step positioning of a cleavage furrow by cortexillin and myosin II 

Igor Weber, Ralph Neujahr, Aiping Du, Jana Koehler, Jan Faix and Guenther
Gerisch

Max-Planck-Institut fuer Biochemie, Am Klopferspitz 18a, D-82152
Martinsried, Germany

Current Biology, in press.

Background: 
The conventional myosin II is dispensable for mitotic division in
Dictyostelium if the cells are attached to a substrate, but is required in
suspension. Only a small fraction of attached myosin II-null cells fails to
divide. Cortexillins are actin-bundling proteins important for the
formation of a regular cleavage furrow, even in attached cells.
Cortexillins translocate to the midzone of mitotic cells independent of
their contact to a substrate. The cooperation of myosin II and cortexillin
I in determining the position of a cleavage furrow is subject of the paper. 

Results: 
The fraction of attached myosin II-null cells that fail to divide is
analysed using GFP-cortexillin I as a marker for priming of a cleavage
furrow. We show that positioning of a cleavage furrow is split into two
steps. In a myosin II- and substrate-independent process, cortexillin I
delineates a zone around the equatorial region of the cell where a cleavage
furrow can be formed. Myosin II reliably focusses the cleavage furrow to
the middle of this cortexillin I zone. If asymmetric cleavage in the
absence of myosin II partitions a cell into a binucleate and an anucleate
portion, cell-surface ruffles are induced along the cleavage furrow, which
lead to movement of the anucleate portion along the connecting strand
towards the binucleate one. 

Conclusions: 	
In myosin II-null cells, cleavage furrow positioning occurs in two steps:
priming of the furrow region and actual cleavage, which may proceed in the
middle or at one border of the cortexillin ring. A control mechanism acting
at late cytokinesis prevents cell division into an anucleate and a
binucleate portion, causing a displaced furrow to regress if it becomes
aberrantly located on top of polar microtubule asters.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Discrete Interactions in Cell Adhesion Measured by Single-Molecule Force
Spectroscopy

Martin Benoit, Daniela Gabriel*, Guenther Gerisch* & Hermann E. Gaub

LMU, Sektion Physik, Amalienstr 54, D-80799 Muenchen, Germany
* MPI fuer Biochemie, Am Klopferspitz 18a, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany 

Nature Cell Biology, in press.

Cell-to-cell adhesion mediated by specific cell-surface molecules is
essential for multicellular development. We controlled the interaction
between single cells and combined single-molecule force spectroscopy with
genetic manipulation in order to measure de-adhesion forces at the
resolution of individual cell-adhesion molecules. The measurements were
focussed on contact site A as a prototype of cell adhesion proteins. The
csA glycoprotein is specifically expressed in aggregating cells of
Dictyostelium discoideum, which are engaged in the process of building up a
multicellular organism. De-adhesion between two adjacent cell surfaces were
found to be composed of discrete interactions characterized by an unbinding
force of 23 ±8 pN measured at a rupture rate of 2.5 ±0.5 µm/sec.
 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 14, number 10]
