Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 14, number 1
January 8, 2000

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

=============
  Abstracts
=============

Dissection of functional domains by expression of point mutated profilins
in Dictyostelium mutants

Soo Sim Lee 1*, Iakowos Karakesisoglou 1§*, Angelika A. Noegel 2, Daniela
Rieger 1 and Michael Schleicher 1

1 Adolf-Butenandt-Institut f. Zellbiologie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität,
Schillerstr. 42, 80336 München, FRG
2 Biochemie I, Med. Fak., Universitaet zu Köln, J. Stelzmann-Str. 52, 50931
Köln, FRG
3 corresponding author
* contributed equally to this work
§ Current address: Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular
Genetics, Cell Biology, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University
of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA

accepted: Eur. J. Cell Biol.

Profilin is an ubiquitous cytoskeletal protein whose function is
fundamental to the maintenance of normal cell physiology. By site directed
mutagenesis of profilin II from Dictyostelium discoideum the point
mutations K114E and W3N were generated by PCR thus changing actin and
poly-(L)-proline binding activity respectively. W3N profilin is no longer
able to bind to poly-(L)-proline concomitant with a slight reduction in
actin binding. The K114E profilin exhibited profound decrease in its
ability to interact with actin, whereas binding to poly-(L)-proline was
essentially unchanged. Binding to phospholipids was indistinguishable from
the wild-type profilin. The in vivo properties of the point mutated
profilins were studied by expressing either W3N or K114E in profilin-minus
D. discoideum mutants which have defects in the F-actin content,
cytokinesis and development (Haugwitz et al., Cell 79:303-314, 1994).
Expression of K114E or W3N displayed a reduction in the F-actin content,
normal cell morphology, and the transformants were capable of undergoing
complete development. Interestingly, only cells that drastically
overexpressed W3N could restore the aberrant phenotype, whereas the mutant
protein K114E with its fully functional poly-(L)-proline binding and its
strongly reduced actin-binding activities rescued the phenotype at low
concentrations. Wild-type and both mutated profilins are enriched in
phagocytic cups during uptake of yeast particles. These data suggest a)
that a functional poly-(L)-proline binding activity is more important for
suppression of the mutant phenotype than the G-actin binding activity of
profilin, and b) that the enrichment of profilin in highly active
phagocytic cups might be independent of either poly-(L)-proline or
actin-binding activities.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

amiB, a novel gene required for the growth/differentiation transition 
in Dictyostelium 
 
Takahide Kon, Hiroyuki Adachi, and Kazuo Sutoh
 
Department of Life Sciences, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, 
University of Tokyo, 3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan.

Genes to Cells in press (Vol. 5, No. 1)
 
Abstract

   Background: The differentiation programme of Dictyostelium discoideum 
is initiated by starvation. Nutrient depletion triggers the differentiation 
of Dictyostelium cells through the transcriptional inactivation of some 
growth-phase genes as well as through the transcriptional activation of 
essential genes required for the aggregation of the cells. The adenylyl 
cyclase (ACA) gene, acaA, is one of the earliest genes expressed following 
starvation. ACA produces intracellular and extracellular cAMP that drives 
further differentiation by inducing chemotaxis, developmental gene 
expression, and morphogenesis of Dictyostelium cells. Although several 
genes have been identified as being essential for the initiation of 
differentiation process, such as the transcriptional activation of ACA 
expression, the molecular mechanisms of the growth/differentiation 
transition are still remain to be explored. 
   Results: Using insertional mutagenesis, we have isolated a mutant 
that does not aggregate upon starvation. The disrupted gene, amiB 
(aggregation minus B), is predicted to encode a novel protein of 
298.9 kDa. When starved, amiB- cells produced an undetectable level 
of cAMP. Analyses of gene expression showed that amiB- cells fail to 
turn off the expression of one of the growth-phase genes, cprD, and 
to turn on the expression of ACA following starvation. The ectopic 
expression of ACA from a constitutive promoter rescued the 
differentiation and morphogenesis of amiB- mutants. Furthermore, 
the ectopic expression of a putative transcriptional factor DdMyb2 
or a catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA-C), 
both of which are suggested to be involved in the ACA expression 
pathway(s), also rescued the starvation-induced ACA expression and 
further differentiation of amiB- mutant.
   Conclusion: These results suggest that AmiB play a role at the 
start of Dictyostelium differentiation through the induction of ACA 
expression essential for the cAMP signaling.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Evidence that a cell-type-specific efflux pump regulates cell 
differentiation in Dictyostelium.

J. Randall Good and Adam Kuspa

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA, 77030, USA

Dev. Biol., in press.

Summary

   We have identified a cellular efflux pump, RhT, with the properties of 
an MDR transporter- a type of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter whose 
substrates include small hydrophobic molecules. RhT transports rhodamine 
123 (Rh123), and is inhibited by low temperature, energy poisons, and several 
MDR transport inhibitors, such as verapamil. All vegetative cells have RhT 
activity, but during development prestalk cells lose RhT activity while prespore 
cells retain it. We also identified several RhT inhibitors. The most effective 
inhibitor is the stalk cell-inducing chlorinated alkyl phenone, DIF-1. The RhT 
inhibitors disrupted development, to varying degrees, and induced stalk cell 
formation in submerged culture. The inhibitors displayed the same rank order 
of pharmacological efficacy for stalk cell induction as they did for Rh123 
transport inhibition. We also found that cerulenin, a specific inhibitor of 
DIF-1 biosynthesis [Kay (1998). J. Biol. Chem. 273(5):2669-2675], abolished 
the induction of stalk cells by each of the RhT inhibitors, and this effect 
could be reversed by DIF-1. Thus, DIF-1 synthesis appears to be required 
for the induction of stalk cells by the RhT inhibitors. Since DIF-1 is the 
most potent inhibitor of RhT activity, and thus a likely transport substrate 
itself, we propose that RhT inhibitors induce stalk cell differentiation by 
blocking DIF-1 export, causing DIF-1 to build-up within cells. Our results 
provide evidence for a prespore-specific efflux pump that regulates cell 
fate determination, perhaps by regulating the cellular concentration of DIF-1.  

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

"Localization of the G-protein beta-gamma Complex in Living Cells during 
Chemotaxis"

Tian Jin, Ning Zhang, Yu Long, Carole A. Parent, Peter N. Devreotes* 

Science, in press

Department of Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, U.S.A.

Abstract

Gradients of chemoattractants elicit signaling events at the leading edge 
of a cell even though chemoattractant receptors are uniformly distributed 
on the cell surface.  In highly polarized Dictyostelium discoideum amoebae, 
membrane-associated beta-gamma subunits of heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide 
binding proteins (G-proteins) were localized in a shallow anterior-posterior 
gradient.  A uniformly applied chemoattractant generated binding sites for 
pleckstrin homology (PH) domains on the inner surface of the membrane in a 
pattern similar to that of the Gbg-subunits.  Loss of cell polarity resulted 
in uniform distribution of both the Gbg-subunits and the sensitivity of 
PH-domain recruitment.  These observations indicate that Gbg-subunits are not
sufficiently localized to restrict signaling events to the leading edge but 
their distribution may determine the relative chemotactic sensitivity of 
polarized cells. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A diffusible factor involved in MAP-kinase ERK2-regulated development of
Dictyostelium

Mineko Maeda* and Hidekazu Kuwayama

Department of Biology, Graduate School of Science, Osaka University
1-16 Machikaneyama-cho, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, JAPAN

Dev. Growth Differ. in press 

ABSTRACT

   MAP kinase ERK2 is essential for regulation of the intracellular 
cAMP level in Dictyostelium. The mutant lacking ERK2, erk2-null, is 
arrested at the pre-aggregation stage, but develops into a fruiting 
body in a mixed population of wild-type and mutant cells. This fact 
implies that wild-type cells provide a certain factor that is missing 
in erk2-null. We clarified that both wild-type strains KAx3 and Ax2 
secrete a diffusible factor that enables erk2-null to develop. The 
fruiting body formed from erk2-null cells was smaller than that formed 
by the wild-type cells and consisted of a small sorus supported by a 
slender stalk with a single row of vacuolated stalk cells. The resulting 
spores were able to germinate and multiply on a bacterial lawn, but they 
were unable to develop unless the factor was provided. After 8 h of 
starvation, wild-type cells started to secrete the factor, which had 
a molecular mass of less than 3-kD and was heat stable.  The effect of 
this factor could not be mimicked by either cAMP or folate.  Adenylyl 
cyclase A and cell surface cAMP receptors cAR1 and cAR3 were all
indispensable components for the factor to function. Considering the
molecular mass and the mode of action, this factor could be a novel one.
Possible targets of this factor are discussed in terms of PKA activation.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 14, number 1]

  