Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 14, number 3
January 29, 2000

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

=============
  Abstracts
=============


Multiple O-glycoforms on the spore coat protein SP96 in Dictyostelium 
discoideum

Marcus Mreyen, Alan Champion, Keith L. Williams and Nicolle H. Packer

J. Biol.Chem., In press

Abstract

   A decreased level of fucosylation on certain spore coat proteins of 
Dictyostelium discoideum alters the permeability of the spore coat. Here 
the post-translational modifications of a major spore coat protein, SP96, 
are studied in a wild-type strain (X22) and a fucosylation defective mutant 
(HU2470). A novel phosphoglycan structure on SP96 of the wild type strain, 
consisting of Fuc-GlcNAc- alpha-1-P-Ser, was identified by electrospray 
ionisation mass spectrometry (ESI-MS). It was shown using monosaccharide 
and gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GC-MS) analysis that SP96 in 
the mutant HU2470 contained approximately 20% of wild type levels of 
fucose, as a result of a missing terminal fucose on the novel glycan 
structure. The results support previous predictions, based on inhibition 
studies on different fucose deficient strains, about the nature of 
monoclonal antibody (mAb) epitopes identified by mAbs MUD62 and MUD166, 
which are known to identify O-linked glycans (Champion et al. (1995).
Microbiology 141, 785-97). Quantitative studies on wild-type SP96 indicated 
there were approximately 60 sites with phosphodiester linked N-acetyl- 
glucosamine-fucose disaccharide units and a further approximately 20 sites 
with fucose directly linked to the protein. Over 70% of the serine sites 
are modified, with less than 1% of these sites phosphorylated without 
further glycosylation. Threoinine and tyrosine residues were not found 
to be modified. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dictyostelium amoebae lacking an F-box protein form spores rather than 
stalk in chimeras with wild-type

Herbert L. Ennis*, Dee N. Dao*, Stefan U. Pukatzki, and Richard H. Kessin

Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Columbia University, 630 West 168th St.
N.Y., N.Y. 10032, USA

Accepted,  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA 

Summary: Using a selection for Dictyostelium mutants that preferentially 
form spores we have recovered a mutant called CheaterA. In chimeras with 
isogenic wild-type cells, the CheaterA mutant preferentially forms viable 
spores rather than inviable stalk cells. The mutant causes wild-type cells 
that have begun to express spore-specific genes to migrate to the prestalk 
compartment of the developing organism. In the wild-type, the chtA 
transcript is absent in growing cells and appears early in development. 
No transcript was detected in mutant slugs by northern blot. The chtA gene 
codes for a protein with an F-box and WD40 domains. This class of protein 
usually forms part of a complex that targets specific protein substrates 
for ubiquitination and degradation.

Note: Our colleagues Margaret Nelson, Jeff Williams, and Rick Firtel have 
also cloned and studied this gene. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The actin cytoskeleton of Dictyostelium: a story from mutants

Angelika A. Noegel and Michael Schleicher*


Institut für Biochemie I, Medizinische Fakultät, Universität zu Köln,
Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 52, 50931 Köln, FRG, *Adolf-Butenandt-Institut für
Zellbiologie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Schillerstr. 42, 80336
München, FRG

J. Cell Sci.

SUMMARY

Actin-binding proteins are effectors of cell signalling and coordinators of
cellular behaviour. Emphasis in research of the Dictyostelium actin
cytoskeleton focusses both on the elucidation of the function of bona fide
actin-binding proteins as well as on proteins involved in signalling to the
cytoskeleton. A major part of this work is concerned with the analysis of
Dictyostelium mutants. The results derived from these investigations have
added to our understanding of the role of the actin cytoskeleton in growth
and development. Furthermore, the studies identified several cellular and
developmental stages, that are particularly sensitive to an unbalanced
cytoskeleton. In addition, use of GFP fusion proteins unravels the spatial
and temporal patterns of their association with the cytoskeleton.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Dictyostelium LIM domain-containing protein LIM2 is essential for 
proper chemotaxis and morphogenesis

Sharon Chien, Chang Y. Chung, Sujatha Sukumaran, Nicholas Osborne, Susan Lee, 
Charlene Ellsworth, James G. McNally, and Richard A. Firtel

Molecular Biology of the Cell, in press.

ABSTRACT

We have identified limB, a gene encoding a novel LIM domain containing 
protein, LIM2 in a screen for genes required for morphogenesis. limB null 
cells aggregate, although poorly, but they are unable to undergo morphogenesis 
and the aggregates arrest at the mound stage. limB null cells exhibit an 
aberrant actin cytoskeleton and have numerous F-actin-enriched microspikes. 
The cells exhibit poor adhesion to a substratum and do not form tight cell-cell 
agglomerates in suspension. Furthermore, limB null cells are unable to 
properly polarize in chemoattractant gradients and move very poorly. 
Expression of limB from a prestalk-specific but not a prespore-specific 
promoter complements the morphogenetic defects of the limB null strain, 
suggesting that the limB null cell developmental defect results from an 
inability to properly sort prestalk cells. LIM2 protein is enriched in the 
cortex of wild-type cells, although it does not co-localized with the actin 
cytoskeleton. Our analysis indicates that LIM2 is a new regulatory protein 
that functions to control rearrangements of the actin cytoskeleton and is 
required for cell motility and chemotaxis. Our findings may be generally 
applicable to understanding pathways controlling cell movement and 
morphogenesis in all multicellular organisms. Structure function studies 
on the LIM domains is presented.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Charge Changes in Loop 2 Affect the Thermal Unfolding of the Myosin Motor 
Domain Bound to F-Actin.

Michael A. Ponomarev‡, Marcus Furch, Dmitrii I. Levitsky‡, and Dietmar J. 
Manstein*

‡ A.N.Bach Institute of Biochemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences, Leninsky 
prosp. 33, Moscow 117071, Russia, and Max-Planck-Institut für Medizinische 
Forschung, Jahnstr. 29, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany

Biochemistry, in press

ABSTRACT

   The thermal unfolding of Dictyostelium discoideum myosin head fragments 
with alterations in the actin-binding surface loop 2 was studied by 
differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). Lengthening of loop 2 without 
concomitant charge changes led to decreases in the transition temperature of 
not more than 1.8oC. Insertions with multiple positive or negative charges 
had a stronger destabilizing effect and led to reductions in the thermal 
transition temperature of up to 3.7oC. In the presence of nucleotide, most 
mutants displayed similar or higher transition temperatures than M765. Only 
constructs M765(11/+6) and M765(20/+12) with long positively charged inserts 
showed transition temperatures that were more than 2oC below the values 
measured for M765 in the presence of ADP, ADP-AlF4 and ADP-BeF3. Interaction 
with F-actin in the presence of ADP shifted the thermal transition of M765 
by 6oC, from 49.1°C to 55.1°C. The actin-induced increase in thermal 
stability varied between 1.2 and 9.1°C and showed a strong correlation with 
the mutant constructs’ affinity for actin. Our results show that length and 
charge changes in loop 2 do not significantly affect nucleotide-induced 
structural changes in the myosin motor domain, but they affect structural 
changes that occur when the motor domain is strongly bound to actin and 
affect the coupling between the actin- and nucleotide binding sites.



----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 14, number 3]

  