Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 14, number 13
June 24, 2000

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

==============
  Abstracts
==============

Isolation and characterization of casein kinase I from Dictyostelium 
discoideum

Gema Moreno-Bueno, Carmela Calés, M. Margarita Behrens§ and Margarita 
Fernández-Renart*

Biochem. J., in press.

SUMMARY

In the present study, the molecular cloning and characterization of a 
49-kDa form of casein kinase I (CKI) from Dictyostelium discoideum is 
reported. The predicted aminoacid sequence shares 70% identity with the 
catalytic domain of the mammalian d and e isoforms, Drosophila CKIe and 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe Hhp1, and 63% identity with Hrr25, a 57-kDa 
form of yeast casein kinase involved in DNA repair. D. discoideum CKI 
(DdCKI) was expressed in vegetative asynchronous cells as well as in 
differentiated cells, as detected by Northern-blot analysis. The level 
of DdCKI expression does not change during the cell cycle. Antibodies 
raised against a truncated version of the protein recognize a 49-kDa 
protein from D. discoideum extracts. Protein expression parallels the 
pattern found for the RNA. The expression of D. Discoideum CKI in 
Escherichia coli resulted in an active enzyme that autophosphorylates 
and phosphorylates casein. Immunofluorescence assays show that D.discoideum 
CKI is localized in the cytoplasm and nuclei of Dictyostelium cells. The 
lack of disruptants of the CKI gene suggests that this protein is 
essential for the vegetative growth of D. discoideum. Overxepression of 
D.discoideum CKI results in cells with increased resistance to hydroxyurea, 
suggesting a potential role for this kinase in DNA repair.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Involvement of the glucose-regulated protein 94 (Dd-GRP94) in starvation 
response of Dictyostelium discoideum cells

Tsuyoshi Morita*, Kenji Saitoh, Takashi Takagi and Yasuo Maeda

Biological Institute, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University, Aoba, 
Sendai 980-8578, Japan

Biochemical and Biophysical research communications,  in press.

SUMMARY

Upon deprivation of nutrients, Dictyostelium discoideum Ax-2 cells arrest 
proliferation and initiate a metamorphosed developmental program including 
induction of altered gene expressions which are necessary for 
differentiation.  In Ax-2 cells, we found out a member of Hsp90 family 
usually contained in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), Dd-GRP94 (Dictyostelium 
discoideum glucose-regulated protein 94). In general, GRP94 are induced 
either by glucose-depletion or by depletion of Ca2+ in intracellular Ca2+ 
stores. Unexpectedly, however, the expression of Dd-grp94 was greatly 
reduced within 60 minutes of starvation. Dd-grp94-overexpressing cells 
(GRP94OE cells) collected without forming distinct aggregation-streams, 
and never formed normal fruiting bodies. Also, prespore differentiation as 
well as maturation into spores and stalk cells were particularly impaired 
in the GRP94OE cells. Thus Dd-GRP94 seems to be crucial in late 
differentiation as well as in starvation response.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Pyridoxal kinase knockout of Dictyostelium complemented by the human 
homologue 

Kunde Guo and Peter C. Newell

Department of Biochemistry,  University of Oxford,  South Parks Road, Oxford 
OX1 3QU, UK

FEMS Microbiol. Letts., in press.

SUMMARY

The gene (pykA) coding for pyridoxal kinase which converts pyridoxal (vitamin 
B6) to pyridoxal phosphate, was isolated from Dictyostelium discoideum using 
insertional mutagenesis. Pyridoxal phosphate is a co-factor for the amino acid 
transamination reaction, which is particularly important for Dictyostelium as 
it depends on protein degradation for survival during development.  PykA 
knockout cells were agg-minus on SM plates and grew poorly in axenic medium 
with low yield but growth was restored by the addition of pyridoxal phosphate. 
Sequencing indicated a gene, with one intron, coding for a predicted protein 
of 301 amino acids that was 42% identical in amino acid sequence to human 
pyridoxal kinase. After expression of the wild type gene in E. coli, the 
purified PykA protein product was shown to have pyridoxal kinase enzymatic 
activity with a Km of 8.7 mM for pyridoxal.   Transformation of the 
Dictyostelium knockout mutant with the human pyridoxal kinase gene gave 
almost complete complementation of growth and development in a similar 
manner to that seen using transformation with the wild type Dictyostelium 
gene.  Phylogenetic analysis indicated that the Dictyostelium amino acid 
sequence was closer to human pyridoxal kinase than to pyridoxal kinases of 
lower eukaryotes.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

CBP1 Associates with the Dictyostelium Cytoskeleton and Is Important for
Normal Cell Aggregation under Certain Developmental Conditions 

Akil Dharamsi, diane Tessarolo, Barrie Coukell and Jason Pun
Department of Biology, York University, Toronto, Ontario, M3J 1P3, Canada

Exp. Cell Res. (in press)
	
	In cells of the eukaryotic microorganism, Dictyostelium
discoideum, at least eight small, four EF-hand Ca2+-binding proteins of
unknown function are expressed at specific times during development.  One
of these proteins, calcium-binding protein 1 (CBP1), first appears just
prior to cell aggregation and then is present at relatively constant
levels throughout development. To determine a role for CBP1 during
development, the protein was used as bait in a yeast two-hybrid screen to
reveal putative CBP1-interacting proteins. Two proteins identified in this
screen were the actin-binding proteins, protovillin and EF-1a . Using an
in vitro binding assay, both of these proteins were found to interact with
CBP1 in the absence of Ca2+, but the interaction of CBP1 with EF-1a was
increased substantially by Ca2+.  CBP1 was also shown by fluorescence
microscopy and by binding assays to associate with the actin cytoskeleton
of Dictyostelium cells during development, and these interactions were
partially Ca2+ dependent.  cbpA-null cells grew normally, but under
certain developmental conditions, cell aggregation was prolonged and
irregular.  This defect in aggregation appeared to be related to a general
reduction in cell motility rather than to a decrease in the ability of the
cells to respond to the chemoattractant, cAMP.  Together, these results
suggest that CBP1 might function to help regulate the reorganization of
the Dictyostelium actin cytoskeleton during cell aggregation.
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A novel role of differentiation-inducing factor-1 (DIF-1) in Dictyostelium
development, assessed by the restoration of a developmental defect of the 
mutant lacking MAP-kinase, ERK2

Hidekazu Kuwayama,1 Masakazu Oyama,2 Yuzuru Kubohara,3 and Mineko Maeda1*

1) Department of Biology, University of Osaka, Machikaneyama-cho 1-16, 
Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan. 2) Department of Life Science, Faculty 
of Science, Himeji Institute of Technology, Shosha 2107, Himeji, Hyogo 
671-2201, Japan. 3) Biosignal Research Center, Institute for Molecular 
and Cellular Regulation (IMCR), Gunma University, Showa-machi 3-39-15, 
Maebashi, 371-8512, Japan.

Development, Growth & Differentiation (in press)

Summary 

   We have previously reported that the differentiating wild-type cells of 
Dictyostelium discoideum secrete a diffusible factor(s) which is able to 
rescue the developmental defect in the mutant lacking MAP-kinase ERK2 encoded 
by the gene erkB. In this study, we demonstrate that DIF-1 (differentiation-
inducing factor for stalk cells) can mimic the role of the factor(s), and we 
also discuss the mechanism of the action of DIF-1 in the erkB-null mutant. 
The mutant usually never form multicellular aggregates because of its defect 
in cAMP signaling. In the presence of 100 nM DIF-1, however, the mutant cells 
formed tiny slugs, which eventually developed into small fruiting bodies. By 
contrast, DIF-1 never rescued the developmental arrest of other Dictyostelium 
mutants lacking adenylyl cyclase A (ACA), cAMP receptors (cAR1 and cAR3), 
heterotrimeric G protein, the cytosolic regulator of ACA (CRAC), or the 
catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA-C).  Most importantly, 
it was found that DIF-1 did not affect the cellular cAMP level but rather 
elevated the transcriptional level of pka during the development of erkB-null 
cells. These results suggest that DIF-1 may rescue the developmental defect 
in erkB-null cells via the increase in PKA activity, thus giving the first 
conclusive evidence that DIF-1 plays a crucial role in the early event of 
Dictyostelium development as well as in prestalk- and stalk-cell induction.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 14, number 13]
