Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 14, number 7
April 1, 2000

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"


=============
  Abstracts
=============

Dictyostelium, A Model Organism For Microtubule-Based Transport.

Michael Koonce
Division of Molecular Medicine, Wadsworth Center, Albany, NY 12201-0509.

in press: Protist. 151 (June 2000)

No abstract, but here is a paragraph from the introduction.

Although investigated at a lower level than in many other cell types or
organisms, the number of Dictyostelium microtubule-associated proteins
characterized in the past decade has steadily increased (e.g. Kimble et al.
1992, Sellitto et al. 1992, Kalt and Schliwa, 1996, Gräf et al. 1999).
Recent cloning of the single copy a-, b-, and g-tubulin genes has also
opened up several molecular avenues that increase microtubule visibility
and manipulation (Triviños-Lagos et al. 1993a, Euteneuer et al. 1998). The
development of an in vitro motility assay now allows detailed analyses of
microtubule-based motor protein functions, especially when coupled with
molecular genetic disruptions or modifications (Pollock et al. 1998, 1999).
It seems reasonable to propose that a critical threshold of reagents has
been assembled that will greatly facilitate investigation of
microtubule-based movement in this organism. This mini-review focuses on
the dynein and kinesin-like mechanoenzymes of Dictyostelium and their roles
here in microtubule-based intracellular transport. A few recent experiments
are also highlighted, to stress the utility of Dictyostelium as a model
organism for microtubule-based motility.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Optimizing heterologous expression in Dictyostelium: importance of 5'
codon adaptation

Elisa B. Vervoort, Arno van Ravestein, Noël N.M.E. van Peij, Judith C.
Heikoop, Peter J.M. van Haastert, Gijs F.Verheijden, Maarten H.K.
Linskens

Cell Engineering Facility GBB, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4,
9747 AG Groningen, The Netherlands

Nucleic Acids Research, in press

ABSTRACT

Expression of heterologous proteins in Dictyostelium discoideum presents
unique research opportunities, such as the functional analysis of
complex human glycoproteins after random mutagenesis. In one study,
human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) and human follicle stimulating
hormone were expressed in Dictyostelium. During the course of these
experiments, we also investigated the role of codon usage and of the DNA
sequence upstream of the ATG start codon. The Dictyostelium genome has a
higher AT content than the human, resulting in a different codon
preference. The hCG-beta gene contains three clusters with infrequently
used codons that were changed to codons that are preferred by
Dictyostelium. The results reported here show that optimizing the first
5-17 codons of the hCG gene contributes to 4 to 5- fold increased
expression levels, but that further optimization has no significant
effect. These observations suggest that optimal codon usage contributes
to ribosome stabilization, but does not play an important role during
the elongation phase of translation. Furthermore, adapting the 5'
sequence of the hCG gene to the Dictyostelium 'Kozak'- like sequence
increased expression levels about 1.5 fold. Thus, using both codon
optimization and 'Kozak' adaptation, a 6 to 8 fold increase of
expression levels could be obtained for hCG.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------


Inactivation of lmpA, Encoding a LIMPII-Related Endosomal Protein,
Suppresses the Internalization and Endosomal Trafficking Defects in
Profilin-Null Mutants

Lesly Temesvari1,*, Linyi Zhang2, Brent Fodera1, Klaus-Peter Janssen3,
Michael Schleicher3 and James A. Cardelli1,2

1Feist-Weiller Cancer Center and 2Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Louisiana State University Medical Center, Shreveport, LA 71130 and
3A.-Butenandt-Institut fuer Zellbiologie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universtaet,
80336 Muenchen, FRG.

Mol. Biol. Cell, in press.

ABSTRACT  

Profilin is a key phosphoinositide and actin binding protein connecting and
coordinating  changes in signal transduction pathways with alterations in
the actin cytoskeleton.  We demonstrate using biochemical assays and
microscopic approaches that profilin-null cells are defective in
macropinocytosis, fluid phase efflux and secretion of lysosomal enzymes, but
are unexpectedly more efficient in phagocytosis compared to wild-type cells.
Disruption of the lmpA gene encoding a protein (DdLIMP) belonging to the
CD36/LIMPII family suppressed, to different degrees, most of the profilin
minus defects, including the increase in F-actin, but did not rescue the
secretion defect. Immunofluorescence microscopy indicated that DdLIMP, also
capable of binding phosphoinositides, was associated with macropinosomes,
but not detected in the plasma membrane. Also, inactivation of the lmpA gene
in wild-type strains resulted in defects in macropinocytosis and fluid phase
efflux, but not in phagocytosis. These results suggest an important role for
profilin in regulating the internalization of fluid and particles, and
movement of material along the endosomal pathway, and demonstrate a
functional interaction between profilin and DdLIMP that may connect
phosphoinositide-based signaling through the actin cytoskeleton with
endo-lysosomal membrane trafficking events.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Analysis of the promoter of the cudA gene reveals novel mechanisms of
Dictyostelium cell type differentiation

Masashi Fukuzawa and Jeffrey G. Williams*

Department of Anatomy and Physiology, University of Dundee, MSI/WTB 
Complex, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH

Development, in press.

SUMMARY

The cudA gene encodes a nuclear protein that is essential for normal
multicellular development. At the slug stage cudA is expressed in the
prespore cells and in a sub-region of the prestalk zone. We show that cap
site distal promoter sequences direct cudA expression in prespore cells,
while proximal sequences direct expression in the prestalk sub-region. The
promoter domain that directs prespore-specific transcription consists of a
positively acting region, that has the potential to direct expression in
all cells within the slug, and a negatively acting region that prevents
expression in the prestalk cells. Dd-STATa is the STAT protein that
regulates commitment to stalk cell gene expression, where it is known to
function as a transcriptional repressor. We show that Dd-STATa binds in
vitro to the positively acting part of the prespore domain of the cudA
promoter. However, Dd-STATa cannot be utilised for this purpose in vivo,
because analysis of a Dd-STATa null mutant strain shows that Dd-STATa is
not necessary for cudA transcription in prespore cells. In contrast, the
part of the cudA promoter that directs prestalk-specific expression
contains a binding site for Dd-STATa that is essential for its biological
activity. Dd-STATa appears therefore to serve as a direct activator of cudA
transcription in prestalk cells, while a protein with a DNA binding
specificity highly related to that of Dd-STATa is utilised to activate cudA
transcription in prespore cells.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Developmental changes in the spatial expression of genes involved in myosin
function in Dictyostelium

Mineko Maeda1*, Hidekazu Kuwayama1, Masako Yokoyama1, Keiko Nishio1,
Takahiro Morio2, Hideko Urushihara2, Mariko Katoh2 Yoshimasa Tanaka2, Tamao
Saito3, Hiroshi Ochiai3, Keiko Takemoto4, Hiroo Yasukawa5, and Ikuo
Takeuchi6

1Department of Biology, Graduate School of Science, Osaka Univ.,
Machikaneyama 1-16, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan, 2Institute of
Biological Sciences, Univ., Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8572, Japan,
3Division of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Hokkaido Univ.,
Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-0810, Japan, 4Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto
Univ., Kyoto 606-8507, Japan, 5Faculty of Engineering, Toyama Univ., Toyama,
Toyama 930-8555, Japan, 6Novartis Foundation for the Promotion of Science,
Takarazuka, Hyogo 665-0042, Japan

Develop. Biol. in press.

Abstract

  We analyzed the spatial expression patterns of the genes involved in
myosin function by in situ hybridization at the tipped aggregate and early
culmination stages of Dictyostelium. Myosin heavy chain II (MHC-II) mRNA was
enriched in the anterior prestalk region of the tipped aggregates, whereas
it disappeared from there and began to appear in both upper and lower cups
of the early culminants. Similarly, mRNAs for essential light chain,
regulatory light chain, myosin light chain kinase A and myosin heavy chain
kinase C were enriched in the prestalk region of the tipped aggregates.
However, expression of these genes was distinctively regulated in the early
culminants. These findings suggest the existence of mechanisms responsible
for the expression of particular genes.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------


Differential developmental expression and cell type specificity of 
Dictyostelium catalases and their response to oxidative stress and UV-light

Ma. Xenia U. Garcia1, Christopher Foote1, Saskia van Es2, Peter N. 
Devreotes2, Stephen Alexander1 and Hannah Alexander1

1Division of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, 
MO 65211-7400
2 Department of Biological Chemistry, The Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205

In press, Biochimica et Biophysica Acta

ABSTRACT

	Cells of Dictyostelium discoideum are highly resistant to DNA 
damaging agents such as UV-light, gamma-radiation and chemicals.  The genes 
encoding nucleotide excision repair (NER) and base excision repair (BER) 
enzymes are rapidly upregulated in response to UV-irradiation and DNA-damaging 
chemicals, suggesting that this is at least partially responsible for the 
resistance of this organism to these agents.  Although Dictyostelium is also 
unusually resistant to high concentrations of H2O2, little is known about 
the response of this organism to oxidative stress.  To determine if 
transcriptional upregulation is a common mechanism for responding to DNA 
damaging agents, we have studied the Dictyostelium catalase and Cu/Zn 
superoxide dismutase antioxidant enzymes.  We show that there are two catalase 
genes, and that each is differentially regulated both temporally and 
spatially during multicellular development.  The catA gene is expressed 
throughout growth and development and its corresponding enzyme is maintained 
at a steady level.  In contrast, the catB gene encodes a larger protein and 
is only expressed during the final stages of morphogenesis.  Cell type 
fractionation showed that the CatB enzyme is exclusively localized to the 
prespore cells, and the CatA enzyme is found exclusively in the prestalk 
cells.  Each enzyme has a different subcellular localization.  The unique 
developmental timing and cell type distribution suggest that the role for 
catB in cell differentiation is to protect the dormant spores from 
oxidative damage.  We found that exposure to H2O2 does not result in the 
induction of the catalase, superoxide dismutase, NER or BER mRNAs.  A 
mutant with greatly reduced levels of catA mRNA and enzyme has greatly 
increased sensitivity to H2O2 but normal sensitivity to UV.  These results 
indicate that the natural resistance to oxidative stress is not due to an 
ability to rapidly raise the level of antioxidant or DNA repair enzymes, 
and that the response to UV-light is independent from the response to 
reactive oxygen compounds.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 14, number 7]

  