Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 14, number 5
February 26, 2000

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"


=============
  Abstracts
=============

Myosin II-independent cytokinesis in Dictyostelium: its mechanism and
implications.

Taro Q. P. Uyeda1, Chikako Kitayama1 and Shigehiko Yumura2

1: Biomolecular Research Group, National Institute for Advanced
Interdisciplinary Research, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8562, Japan
2: Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Yamaguchi University,
Yamaguchi 753-8512, Japan.

Cell Structure and Function, in press

Abstract

	Similar to higher animal cells, ameba cells of the cellular
slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum form contractile rings containing
filaments of myosin II during mitosis, and it is generally believed that
contraction of these rings bisects the cells.  In suspension, mutant cells
lacking the single myosin II heavy chain gene cannot carry out cytokinesis,
become large and multinucleate, and eventually lyze, supporting the idea
that myosin II plays critical roles in cytokinesis.  These mutant cells are
however viable on substrates.  Analyses of these mutant cells on substrates
revealed that, in addition to "classic" cytokinesis which depends on myosin
II ("cytokinesis A"), Dictyostelium has two distinct, novel methods of
cytokinesis, 1) attachment-assisted mitotic cleavage employed by myosin II
null cells on substrates ("cytokinesis B"), and 2) cytofission, a cell
cycle-independent division of adherent cells ("cytokinesis C").  Cytokinesis
A, B, and C lose their function such as accuracy and robustness, and demand
fewer protein factors in this order.  Cytokinesis B is of particular
importance for future studies.  Similar to cytokinesis A, cytokinesis B
involves formation of a cleavage furrow in the equatorial region, and it may
be a primitive but basic mechanism of efficiently bisecting a cell in a cell
cycle-coupled manner.  Analysis of large, multinucleate myosin II null cells
suggested that interactions between astral microtubules and cortices
positively induce polar protrusive activities.  A model is proposed to
explain how such polar activities drive cytokinesis B, and how cytokinesis B
is coordinated with cytokinesis A in wild type cells.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Molecular biological approaches to study myosin functions in cytokinesis of
Dictyostelium.

Taro Q. P. Uyeda1, and Shigehiko Yumura2

1: Biomolecular Research Group, National Institute for Advanced
Interdisciplinary Research, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8562, Japan
2: Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Yamaguchi University,
Yamaguchi 753-8512, Japan.

Microscopy Research Technique,  in press

Abstract

	The cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum is amenable to
biochemical, cell biological and molecular genetic analyses, and offers a
unique opportunity for multifaceted approaches to dissect the mechanism of
cytokinesis.  One of the important questions that are currently under
investigation using Dictyostelium is to understand how cleavage furrows or
contractile rings are assembled in the equatorial region.  Contractile rings
consist of a number of components including parallel filaments of actin and
myosin II.  Phenotypic analyses and in vivo localization studies of cells
expressing mutant myosin IIs have demonstrated that myosin II's transport to
and localization at the equatorial region does not require regulation by
phosphorylation of myosin II, specific amino acid sequences of myosin II, or
the motor activity of myosin II.  Rather, the transport appears to depend on
a myosin II-independent flow of cortical cytoskeleton.  What drives the flow
of cortical cytoskeleton is still elusive.  However, a growing number of
mutants that affect assembly of contractile rings have been accumulated.
Analyses of these mutations, identification of more cytokinesis-specific
genes, and information deriving from other experimental systems, should
allow us to understand the mechanism of contractile ring formation and other
aspects of cytokinesis.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Role of Rac in controlling the actin cytoskeleton and chemotaxis in motile 
cells

Chang Y. Chung, Susan Lee, Celia Briscoe, Charlene Ellsworth, and Richard 
A. Firtel

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, in press.

ABSTRACT

We have used the chemotactic ability of Dictyostelium cells to examine 
the roles of Rho family members, known regulators of the assembly of 
F-actin, in cell movement. Wild-type cells polarize with a leading edge 
enriched in F-actin towards a chemoattractant. Overexpression of 
constitutively active Dictyostelium Rac1B61L or disruption of DdRacGAP1, 
which encodes a Dictyostelium Rac1 GAP, induces membrane ruffles enriched 
with actin filaments around the perimeter of the cell and increased levels 
of F-actin in resting cells. Whereas wild-type cells move linearly towards 
the cAMP source, Rac1B61L and Ddracgap1 null cells make many wrong turns 
and chemotaxis is inefficient, which presumably results from the 
unregulated activation of F-actin assembly and pseudopod extension. Cells 
expressing dominant-negative DdRac1B17N do not have a well-defined 
F-actin-rich leading edge and do not protrude pseudopodia, resulting in 
very poor cell motility. From these studies and assays examining 
chemoattractant-mediated F-actin assembly, we suggest DdRac1 regulates 
the basal levels of F-actin assembly, its dynamic reorganization in 
response to chemoattractants, and cellular polarity during chemotaxis.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Functional and molecular identification of novel members of the 
ubiquitous membrane fusion proteins alpha- and gamma-SNAP (Soluble 
NSF-Attachment Proteins) families in Dictyostelium discoideum

Marianne Weidenhaupt1*, Franz Bruckert1**, Mathilde Louwagie2, Jerome 
Garin2 and Michel Satre1

1 DBMS/BBSI (UMR5092 CNRS) and 2 DBMS/CP, CEA-Grenoble, 17 rue des 
Martyrs, 38054 Grenoble Cedex 09, France
*Present address: LIM/IBS, 41 rue Jules Horowitz, 38027 Grenoble 
Cedex 01, France
**corresponding author. E-mail: fbruckert@cea.fr

Eur. J. Biochem., in press.

The soluble NSF-Attachment Proteins (SNAP) are eukaryotic soluble 
proteins required for membrane fusion. Based on their initial 
identification in bovine brain cytosol, they are divided in 
alpha/beta- and gamma-subfamilies. SNAPs act as adapters between NSF 
(N-ethylmaleimide Sensitive Factor), a hexameric ATPase, and membrane 
SNARE proteins (SNAP REceptors). Within the NSF/SNAP/SNARE complex, 
they contribute to the catalysis of an ATP-driven conformational 
change in the SNAREs, resulting in dissociation of the complex. We 
have constructed a Dictyostelium discoideum strain, overexpressing a 
c-myc-tagged form of D. discoideum NSF (NSF-myc). Its 
immunoprecipitation from detergent-solubilised membrane extracts 
reveals two associated polypeptides with apparent molecular masses of 
33 and 36 kDa (p33 and p36), that are absent in NSF-myc 
immunoprecipitates from cytosol. Analysis of trypsin-digested 
peptides by microsequencing and mass spectrometry and comparison with 
cDNA sequences identify p33 and p36 as the D. discoideum homologues 
of alpha- and gamma-SNAP, respectively. The alpha-/gamma-SNAP molar 
ratio is close to 3 in vegetative amoebae from this organism. The 
molecular identification of gamma-SNAP in plants (Arabidopsis 
thaliana) and insects (Drosophila melanogaster) documents for the 
first time the wide distribution of the gamma-subtype. Altogether, 
these results suggest a particular role for gamma-SNAP, possibly 
distinct from that of alpha-SNAP.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 14, number 5]

  