Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 14, number 6
March 4, 2000

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

================
  Announcement
================

NIH has a new model organism.  See: http://www.nih.gov/science/models/

Our thanks should go to the effort spearheaded by Peter Devreotes, Rich 
Kessin, Bill Loomis and Carole Parent and the other members of the 
"Dictyostelium Advisory Committee".  OF course, this just signals the
beginning a much hard work to be done.

Also, many of you may have noticed a new addition to the Dicty web site, 
Dicty in the News.  When any of you has a paper the receives a "News and
Views" type commentary, please let let me know.  I'll feature it in a
similar way.  


=============
  Abstracts
=============

Intracellular growth of Legionella pneumophila in Dictyostelium discoideum,
a system for genetic analysis of host-pathogen interactions
Jonathan M. Solomon1, Adam Rupper2, James A. Cardelli2, and Ralph R. Isberg1

1Howard Hughes Medical Institute
Dept of Microbiology
Tufts University Medical School
Boston, MA 02111

2Department of Microbiology and Immunology
LSU Health Sciences Center
Shreveport, LA 71130

Accepted: Infection and Immunity

Abstract

Conditions were established in which Legionella pneumophila, an
intracellular bacterial pathogen, could replicate within the unicellular
organism Dictyostelium discoideum . By several criteria, L. pneumophila grew
by the same mechanism within D. discoideum as it does in amoebae and
macrophages.  Bacteria grew within membrane-bound vesicles associated with
rough endoplasmic reticulum, and L. pneumophila dot/icm mutants, blocked for
growth in macrophages and amoebae, also did not grow in D. discoideum.
Internalized L. pneumophila avoided degradation by D. discoideum and showed
evidence of reduced fusion with endocytic compartments.  The ability of L.
pneumophila to grow within D. discoideum depended on the growth state of the
cells.  D. discoideum grown as adherent monolayers were susceptible to L.
pneumophila infection and to contact-dependent cytotoxicity during high
multiplicity infections, whereas D. discoideum grown in suspension were
relatively resistant to cytotoxicity and did not support intracellular
growth.  Some known D. discoideum mutants were examined for their effect on
growth of L. pneumophila.  The coronin mutant and the double myosin I
mutant, myoA/B, were more permissive than wild-type strains for
intracellular growth.  Growth of L. pneumophila in a G-beta mutant was
slightly reduced compared to the parent strain.  This work demonstrates the
usefulness of the L. pneumophila/D. discoideum system for genetic analysis
of host-pathogen interactions.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Functional overlap of the Dictyostelium RasG, RasD and RasB proteins.

Meenal Khosla1, George B. Spiegelman1,2, Rob Insall3 and Gerald Weeks1,2

1:  Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC  V6T 1Z3
2:  Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, BC  V6T 1Z3
3:  Department of Biochemistry, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK

Journal of Cell Science, in press

Abstract

	Disruption of the rasG gene in Dictyostelium discoideum results in 
several distinct phenotypes:  a defect in cytokinesis, reduced motility 
and reduced growth.  Reintroduction of the rasG gene restores all of the 
properties of the rasG- cells to those of the wild type.  To determine 
whether the defects are due to impaired interactions with a single or 
multiple downstream effectors, we tested the ability of the highly 
related but non identical Dictyostelium ras genes, rasD and rasB, to 
rescue the defects.
	Introduction of the rasD gene under the control of the rasG 
promoter into rasG null (rasG-) cells, corrected all phenotypes except 
the motility defect, suggesting that motility is regulated by a RasG 
mediated pathway that is different to those regulating growth or 
cytokinesis.  Western blot analysis of RasD protein levels revealed that 
vegetative rasG- cells contained considerably more protein than the parental 
AX-3 cells, suggesting that RasD protein levels are negatively regulated in 
vegetative cells by RasG.  The level of RasD was enhanced when the rasD gene 
was introduced under the control of the rasG promoter, and this increase in 
protein is presumably responsible for the reversal of the growth and 
cytokinesis defects of the rasG- cells.  Thus, RasD protein levels are 
controlled by the level of RasG, but not by the level of RasD.
	Introduction of the rasB gene under the control of the rasG 
promoter into rasG- cells produced a complex phenotype.  The transformants 
were extremely small and mononucleate and exhibited enhanced motility.  
However, the growth of these cells was considerably slower than the growth 
of the rasG- cells, suggesting the possibility that high levels of RasB 
inhibit an essential process.  This was confirmed by expressing rasB in 
wild type cells; the resulting transformants exhibited severely impaired 
growth.  When RasB protein levels were determined by western blot analysis, 
it was found that levels were higher in the rasG- cells than they were in 
the wild type parental, suggesting that RasG also negatively regulates rasB 
expression in vegetative cells.  Overexpression of rasB in the rasG- cells 
also reduced the level of RasD protein.
	In view of the fact that alternate Ras proteins correct some, but 
not all, of the defects exhibited by the rasG- cells, we propose that RasG 
interacts with more than one downstream effector.  In addition, it is clear 
that the levels of the various Ras proteins are tightly regulated in 
vegetative cells and that overexpression can be deleterious.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Light affects cAMP signaling and cell movement activity in Dictyostelium
discoideum

Kota Miura and Florian Siegert*

Zoologisches Institut, Universität München, Luisenstr. 14, 80333 München, 
Germany

PNAS 2000 97:2111-2116

Abstract

The multicellular, slug stage of the slime mould Dictyostelium
discoideum lacks specific sensory cells and organs but can never-theless
respond in a very sensitive manner to external stimuli such as
temperature and light. Within the migrating slug, the behavior of up to
100,000 individual amoebae is coordinated by cAMP mediated cell? cell
signaling and chemotaxis. We report here the striking result that light
directly modulates the cAMP cell? cell signaling system. Light-induced
secretion of cAMP from the slug tips decreased the period length of
optical density waves and speeded up cell movement. A local effect of
light on cAMP release within the slug tip could modulate cell movement
within the slug and thus control its phototactic turning and orientation
toward a light source.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dictyostelium DdCP224 is a microtubule-associated protein and a permanent
centrosomal resident involved in centrosome duplication

Ralph Gräf*, Christine Daunderer and Manfred Schliwa

Adolf-Butenandt-Institut / Zellbiologie, Schillerstr. 42, D-80336 München /
Germany

J. Cell Sci., in press

A cDNA encoding a 224-kD Dictyostelium discoideum centrosomal protein
(DdCP224) was isolated by immunoscreening. DdCP224 was detected at the
centrosome and, more weakly, along microtubules throughout the entire cell
cycle. Centrosomal localization does not require microtubules, suggesting
that DdCP224 is a genuine centrosomal component. DdCP224 exhibits sequence
identity to a weakly conserved class of microtubule-associated proteins
including human TOGp and yeast Stu2p. Stu2p has a size of only ~100 kD and
corresponds to the N-terminal half of DdCP224. The functions of the N- and
C-terminal halves of DdCP224 were investigated in the corresponding
GFP-fusion mutants. Surprisingly, the N-terminal construct showed only
cytosolic localization, whereas the C-terminal construct localized
exclusively to the centrosome. This is unexpected because Stu2p is
localized at the spindle pole body. Full-length DdCP224-GFP was present
both at centrosomes and along microtubules. Furthermore, it bound to
microtubules in vitro, unlike the two truncated mutants. Thus centrosome
binding is determined by the C-terminal half and microtubule binding may
require the interaction of the N- and C-terminal halves. Interestingly,
cells expressing full-length DdCP224-GFP exhibit supernumerary centrosomes
and show a cytokinesis defect, suggesting that DdCP224 plays an important
role in centrosome duplication. These features are unique among the known
centrosomal proteins.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Purification and Cloning of Phosphatidylinositol Transfer
Proteins from Dictyostelium discoideum: Homologues of Both
Mammalian PITPs and S. cerevisiae Sec14p are Found in the
Same Cell

Philip  Swigart, Robert Insall, Andrew Wilkins and Shamshad
Cockcroft

In press, Biochemical Journal


Soluble phosphatidylinositol transfer proteins (PITPs) play important 
roles in lipid-mediated signalling as well as in membrane traffic. 
Two PITPs (PITPa and b) have been cloned from mammalian cells, which 
are unrelated in sequence to yeast PITP (the product of the SEC14 
gene). However, all three PITPs can perform interchangeably to 
reconstitute function in mammalian cells. We have now purified the 
major PITP from the cytoplasm of Dictyostelium discoideum and cloned 
the gene. This protein, DdPITP1, is homologous to mammalian PITPs, a 
and b. We have also cloned a second gene (DdPITP2) which is related 
in sequence to DdPITP1. In addition, an independently cloned cDNA 
encodes a relative of the SEC14 family of yeast PITPs. DdPITP1, 
DdPITP2 and DdSec14 proteins were all able to mediate the transfer of 
PI from one membrane compartment to another, and thus exhibited the 
hallmark of PITPs. Secondly, all three PITPs were able to rescue 
phospholipase C-mediated phosphoinositide hydrolysis in PITP-depleted 
HL60 cells, indicating that all three PITPs were capable of 
stimulating phosphoinositide synthesis. The identification of PITPs 
related to both mammalian PITPs and yeast Sec14p in a single organism 
will provide a unique opportunity to examine the functions of this 
class of proteins using genetic approaches.



----------------------------------------------------------------------------
gdt1, a new signal transduction component for negative regulation of the
growth-differentiation-transition in Dictyostelium discoideum.

Changjiang Zeng1, Christophe Anjard1, Karsten Riemann1, Angelika Konzok2
and Wolfgang Nellen1*

Mol. Biol. of the Cell, in press.

Abstract

Discoidin I expression was used as a marker to screen for mutants affected
in the growth-differentiation-transition (GDT) of Dictyostelium. By REMI
mutagenesis we have isolated mutant 2-9, an overexpressor of discoidin I.
It displays normal morphogenesis but shows premature entry into the
developmental cycle. The disrupted gene was denominated gdt1. The mutant
phenotype was reconstructed by disruptions in different parts of the gene,
suggesting that all had a complete loss of function. gdt1 was expressed in
growing cells, the levels of protein and mRNA appear to increase with cell
density and rapidly decrease with the onset of development. gdt1 encodes a
175 kDa protein with 4 putative transmembrane domains. In the C-terminus,
the derived amino acid sequence displays some similarity to the catalytic
domain of protein kinases. Mixing experiments demonstrate that the gdt1-
phenotype is cell autonomous. The prestarvation factor PSF is secreted at
wild type levels. The response to folate, a negative regulator of discoidin
expression, was not impaired in gdt1 mutants. Cells which lack the G
protein a2, display a loss of discoidin expression and do not aggregate.
gdt1-/Ga2- double mutants show no aggregation but strong discoidin
expression. This suggests that gdt1 is a negative regulator of the GDT
downstream of, or in a parallel pathway to Ga2.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Biology of Cytokinesis

Review as well as original papers will be published in a topical issue 
of Microscope Research and Technique (MRT) entitled "The Biology of 
Cytokinesis", Volume 49, Number 2. This issue is scheduled to be published 
as the cover issue dated April 15, 2000, and will include 3 papers from 
Dictyostelium labs. Focus of this issue is on the dynamics of calcium, 
cytoskeletal and signal molecules during cytokinesis in S. pombe, S. 
saccharomyces, Dictyostelium, Tetrahymena, zebrafish, and tissue culture 
cells. Below is a tetative Table of Contents of this issue.

Table of Contents

1. Yoshio Fukui (Guest Editor: Introductory Review)
"Signal to forces: Central themes in cytokinesis" 
2. Donald C. Chang, and Pin Lu
"Multiple types of calcium signals are associated with cell cleavage in 
zebrafish embryo"
3. Pascal Madaule, Tomoyuki Furusawa, Masatoshi Eda, Haruhiko Bito, 
Toshimasa Ishizaki, and Shu Narumiya
"Citron: a Rho target that affects contractility during cytokinesis"
4. Osamu Numata, Kohsuke Gonda, Atsushi Watanabe, and Yasuhiro Kurasawa
"Cytokinesis in Tetrahymena: Determination of division plane and 
organization of contractile ring"
5. Taro Uyeda and Shigehiko Yumura
"Molecular biological approaches to study myosin functions in cytokinesis 
of Dictyostelium"
6. Denis Larochelle, Noel Gerald, and Arturo De Lozanne
"Molecular analysis of racE function in Dictyostelium"
7. Dan P. Mulvihill, Thein Z. Win, Thomas P. Pack, and Jeremy S. Hyams.
"Cytokinesis in fission yeast: a myosin pas de deux"
8. Fred Chang
"Microtubule and actin-dependent movement of the formin cdc12p in fission 
yeast".
9. John Lippincott and Rong Li
"The involvement of PCH family proteins in cytokinesis and actin 
distribution"
10. Hidemasa Goto, Hidetaka Kosako, and Masaki Inagaki 
"Regulation of intermediate filament organization during cytokinesis: 
Possible roles of rho-associated kinase"
11. Yoshio Fukui
"Real-time high-resolution optical sectioning suggests biphasic 
cytokinetic mechanism in Dictyostelium discoideum"
12. Jean M. Sanger and Joseph W. Sanger
"Assembly of cytoskeletal proteins into cleavage furrows of tissue 
culture cells"
13. Maurizio Gatti, Maria G. Giansanti, and Silvia Bonaccorsi
"The relationships between the central spindle and the contractile 
ring during cytokinesis in animal cells".






----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 14, number 6]

  