Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 14, number 11
May 13, 2000

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"

=============
  Abstracts
=============

Towards a molecular understanding of cytokinesis

Douglas N. Robinson and James A. Spudich

Department of Biochemistry, Beckman Center, Rm. B-400, Stanford 
University, Stanford, CA 94305-5307, USA 

Trends in CELL BIOLOGY 10: 228-237. June, 2000

In this review, we focus on recent discoveries regarding the
molecular basis of cleavage furrow positioning and contractile ring
assembly and contraction during cytokinesis. However, some of
these mechanisms might have different degrees of importance in
different organisms. This synthesis attempts to uncover common
themes and to reveal potential relationships that might contribute
to the biochemical and mechanical aspects of cytokinesis.
Because the information about cytokinesis is still fairly
rudimentary, our goal is not to present a definitive model but to
present testable hypotheses that might lead to a better
mechanistic understanding of the process.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Loss of a member of the aquaporin gene family, aqpA affects spore dormancy
in Dictyostelium 

Biswa Nath Mitra, Ryuji Yoshino, Takahiro Morio, Masako Yokoyama1, Mineko
Maeda1, Hideko Urushihara and Yoshimasa Tanaka

Institute of Biological Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-8572, Japan and 1 Department of Biology, Graduate School of Science,
Osaka University, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan

Gnee, in press.
                                                        
Abstract

    We isolated and characterized a gene from Dictyostelium discoideum
which encodes a protein of 279 amino acids (30.6 kDa) containing six
transmembrane domains with two highly conserved motifs of
asparagine-proline-alanine (NPA) found in the aquaporin family of water
channel proteins, although the second motif of the protein has been
modified into NPV (asparagine-proline-valine). The deduced amino acid
sequences of the gene, which we have named aqpA, is 39% identical to D.
discoideum WacA, 26% identical to human Aqp5, 26% identical to Oryza sativa
PIP2a, 25% identical to yeast Aqy1 and 24% identical to E.coli AqpZ.
Southern analyses indicated that aqpA is present as a single copy in the
genome. Northern blot analysis showed that the developmentally regulated
1-kb mRNA transcript first appears at tight mound stage (12 h), and is
abundant in fingers (16 h) and late culminants (20 h). In situ
hybridization of slugs revealed that aqpA mRNA accumulated in cells of the
prespore region but not in those of the prestalk region. Disruption of aqpA
by homologous recombination did not significantly affect growth or
developmental morphogenesis. Although mutant spores were viable, when
assayed soon after encapsulation, they became permeable to propidium iodide
and lost viability after a week on the top of a fruiting body. Thus AqpA is
essential to maintain spore dormancy perhaps through the regulation of
water flow.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Developmental Cheating and The Evolutionary Biology of Dictyostelium and
Myxococcus

Dee N. Dao, Richard H. Kessin, and Herbert L. Ennis

Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Columbia University
630 West 168th St., N.Y., N.Y. 10032, USA

Microbiology, in press. 


Abstract

    Although widely separated in phylogeny, Dictyostelium and Myxococcus
species have a developmental strategy in common. They both collect cells
from a certain volume of soil and therefore, within their developmental
structures, not all cells are necessarily genetically equivalent. While
laboratory strains are genetically uniform, there is no reason to expect
clonal aggregation in the wild. Twenty percent of cells die to form the
stalk during development of Dictyostelium discoideum and a higher
percentage of aggregating cells die during fruiting body formation of
Myxococcus xanthus.  In this situation, it is likely that cheaters will
arise that form only viable spores and avoid cell fates that lead to death.
Such cheating variants have now been found in M. xanthus and in D.
discoideum. This review discusses the common features of cheater mutants
and how organisms that create multi-cellular structures by aggregation must
solve the problem of parasitism that is avoided in animals that form from
zygotes. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Molecular characterization of a calmodulin-like Dictyostelium protein CalB

Daniel Rösel, Frantisek Puta, Anna Blahuskova, Petr Smykal#, Petr Folk

Department of Physiology and Developmental Biology, #Department of Plant 
Physiology, Charles University, Vinicna 7, Praha 2, 128 00, Czech Republic

FEBS Letters, in press.

A gene named calB was cloned and characterized in Dictyostelium. A 
relationship to calmodulin (CaM) is suggested by sequence identity (50%), 
similar exon-intron structure and cross-reactivity with anti-CaM sera. The 
level of calB mRNA is developmentally regulated with maxima during 
aggregation and in spores. CalB null cells grow normally, develop and 
produce viable spores. We demonstrated the capacity of tagged CalB to 
bind Ca2+ using the 45Ca2+ overlay assay and showed that its mobility on 
SDS-PAGE is dependent on Ca2+/EGTA pretreatment.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Suppression of the Growth/Differentiation Transition in Dictyostelium 
Development by Transient Expression of a Novel Gene, Dia1

Shigenori Hirose, Yuji Inazu, Soo-Cheon Chae2 and Yasuo Maeda

Biological Institute, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University, Aoba,
Sendai 980-8578, Japan

Development, in press.

SUMMARY

In Dictyostelium discoideum Ax-2 cells, a specific check-point (PS-point)
from which cells enter the differentiation phase in response to starvation
has been specified in the cell cycle. Using the differential display method,
we isolated a novel gene, dia1 (differentiation-associated gene 1), as being
specifically expressed in cells differentiating from the PS-point. The dia1
mRNA has an open reading flame of 1,368 bp and is deduced to code for a 48.6
kDa protein (DIA1). The DIA1 protein is highly serine-rich and the serine
residues are predominantly located in the C-terminal region. After the PSORT
search, the protein is predicted to be GPI-anchored at the plasma membrane.  
Unexpectedly, the dia1-overexpression rather impaired the
progression of differentiation, possibly coupling with the reduced
expression of early genes such as cAMP receptor1 (car1). The inhibitory
effect of dia1-expression on early differentiation was almost completely
nullified by externally applied cAMP pulses. In contrast to the
dia1-overexpression, antisense RNA-mediated dia1 inactivation was found to
enhance the initial step of cell differentiation, as exemplified by
precocious expressions of car1 and other early genes. We discuss the unique
structure and function of DIA1 and its relation with cooperative development
of cells during the establishment of multicellular organization.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 14, number 11]
