Dicty News
Electronic Edition
Volume 14, number 4
February 12, 2000

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@nwu.edu.

Back issues of Dicty-News, the Dicty Reference database and other useful
information is available at the Dictyostelium Web Page 
"http://dicty.cmb.nwu.edu/dicty/dicty.html"


======================
  Position Available
======================

GRADUATE STUDENT TEACHING ASSISTANTSHIP	

Teaching assistantship available August 2000 for Ph.D. student to study 
molecular basis for signal transduction and gene expression in 
Dictyostelium discoideum in the laboratory of Dr. Maureen Brandon. 
Assistantship includes stipend plus tuition and fees. Responsibilities 
include teaching undergraduate laboratories, so excellent English speaking 
skills are essential. Idaho State University is located in southeastern 
Idaho with easy access to Nordic and alpine ski areas, hiking, camping 
and mountain biking trails, and Yellowstone and The Grand Teton National 
Parks. Application materials and instructions are available online at 
www.isu.edu/departments/bios/. Contact Dr. Maureen Brandon at 
branmaur@isu.edu prior to submission for further information.

=============
  Abstracts
=============


Cloning and characterization of beta-COP from Dictyostelium discoideum

Eur. J. Cell Biol.

Martina R. Mohrs2+, Klaus-Peter Janssen1+, Thomas Kreis3#, Angelika A.
Noegel2* and Michael Schleicher1

1 Institut für Zellbiologie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität,
Schillerstrasse 42, 80336 München, FRG, 2 Institut für Biochemie I,
Medizinische Einrichtungen der Universität zu Köln, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str.
52, 50931 Köln, FRG, 3 Department of Cell Biology, CH-1211 Geneva, Switzerland


Abstract

We have isolated a cDNA coding for beta-COP from Dictyostelium discoideum
by polymerase chain reaction using degenerate primers derived from rat
beta-COP. The complete cDNA clone has a size of 2.8 kb and codes for a
protein with a calculated molecular mass of 102 kDa. Dictyostelium beta-COP
exhibits highest homology to mammalian beta-COP, but it is considerably
smaller due to a shortened variable region that is thought to form a linker
between the highly conserved N- and C-terminal domains. Dictyostelium
beta-COP is encoded by a single gene, which is transcribed at moderate
levels into two RNAs that are present throughout development. To localize
the protein, full length beta-COP was fused to GFP and expressed in
Dictyostelium cells. The fusion protein was detected on vesicles
distributed all over the cells and was strongly enriched in the perinuclear
region. Based on coimmunofluorescence studies with antibodies directed
against the Golgi marker comitin, this compartment was identified as the
Golgi apparatus. beta-COP distribution in Dictyostelium was not brefeldinA
sensitive being most likely due to the presence of a brefeldinA resistance
gene. However, upon DMSO treatment we observed a reversible disassembly of
the Golgi apparatus. In mammalian cells DMSO treatment had a similar effect
on beta-COP distribution. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Characterization and heterologous expression of cDNAs encoding two novel
closely related Ca2+-binding proteins in Dictyostelium discoideum 

Magdalena Dorywalska, Barrie Coukell and Akil Dharamsi

Department of Biology, York University, 4700 Keele St., Toronto, Ontario,
M3J 1P3, CANADA

Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (in press)

Abstract

	During a yeast two-hybrid screen of a Dictyostelium cDNA library
using the Ca2+-binding protein CBP1 as bait, we isolated a full-length
cDNA encoding a novel Ca2+-binding protein (termed CBP4a). The protein is
composed of 162 amino acids and contains four consensus EF-hands. PCR
amplification of Dictyostelium genomic DNA using primers specific for the
cDNA sequence resulted in the isolation of a gene encoding a different
Ca2+-binding protein of 162 amino acids (designated CBP4b) with 90 % amino
acid sequence identity to CBP4a. Southern blot analysis confirmed the
presence of two closely related genes in the Dictyostelium genome. CBP4a
and CBP4b mRNAs are expressed at the same stages of development as CBP1
mRNA. In addition, both novel proteins bind 45Ca2+ and interact with CBP1
in vitro in a Ca2+-dependent manner. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The tail domain of myosin M catalyses nucleotide exchange on Rac1 GTPases
and can induce actin-driven surface protrusions.

Heidrun A. Geissler, Ronald Ullmann, and Thierry Soldati

Department of Molecular Cell Research, Max-Planck-Institute for Medical
Research, Jahnstrasse 29, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany

Correspondence and requests should be addressed to Thierry Soldati
Tel: +49-6221-486407, Fax: +49-6221-486325
E-mail: soldati@mzf.mpimf-heidelberg.mpg.de

Traffic, in press (May 2000 issue)

Abstract

   Members of the myosin superfamily play crucial roles in cellular processes
including management of the cortical cytoskeleton, organelle transport and
signal transduction. GTPases of the Rho family act as key control elements
in the reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton in response to growth
factors, and other functions such as membrane trafficking, transcriptional
regulation, growth control and development. Here, we describe a novel
unconventional myosin from Dictyostelium discoideum, MyoM. Primary sequence
analysis revealed that it has the appearance of a natural chimera between a
myosin motor domain and a guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) domain
for Rho GTPases. The functionality of both domains was established. Binding
of the motor domain to F-actin was ATP-dependent and potentially regulated
by phosphorylation. The GEF domain displayed selective activity on
Rac1-related GTPases. Overexpression rather than absence of MyoM affected
the cell morphology and viability. Particularly in response to hypoosmotic
stress, cells overexpressing the MyoM tail domain extended massive
actin-driven protrusions. The GEF was enriched at the tip of growing
protuberances, likely through its pleckstrin homology domain. MyoM is the
first unconventional myosin containing an active Rac-GEF domain, suggesting
a role at the interface of Rac-mediated signal transduction and remodeling
of the actin cytoskeleton.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dictyostelium discoideum: a new host model system for intracellular 
pathogens of the genus Legionella


Sonja Haegele,1 Rolf Koehler,1 Hilde Merkert,1 Michael Schleicher,2 
Joerg Hacker, 1 Michael Steinert 1*

1 Institut fuer Molekulare Infektionsbiologie, Universitaet Wuerzburg,
Roentgenring 11,
   D-97070 Wuerzburg, Germany.

2 Institut für Zellbiologie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitaet,
Schillerstrasse 42, 
  D-80336 Muenchen, Gemany.

Accepted: Cellular Microbiology

Summary

   The soil amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum is a haploid eukaryote that, 
upon starvation, aggregates and enters a developmental cycle to produce 
fruiting bodies. In this study, we infected single-cell stages of D. 
discoideum with different Legionella species.  Intracellular growth of 
Legionella in this new host system was compared to their growth in the
natural host Acanthamoeba castellanii. Transmission electron microscopy of
infected D. discoideum cells revealed that legionellae reside within the 
phagosome. Using confocal microscopy it was observed that replicating, 
intracellular, GFP-tagged legionellae did rarely co-localize with 
fluorescent antibodies directed against the lysosomal protein DdLIMP
of D. discoideum. This indicates that the bacteria inhibit fusion of 
phagosomes and lysosomes in this particular host system.
In addition, Legionella infection of D. discoideum inhibited the
differentiation of the host into the multicellular fruiting stage. 
Co-culture studies with profilin-minus D. discoideum mutants and
Legionella resulted in higher rates of infection when compared to 
infections of wild type amoebae.  Because the amoebae are amenable to 
genetic manipulation due to their haploid genome and because a number of 
cellular markers are available, we show for the first time that D. 
discoideum is a valuable model system to  study intracellular pathogenesis 
of microbial pathogens. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Role of cAMP-dependent protein kinase during growth and early development
of Dictyostelium discoideum

Gerd Primpke1, Vasiliki Iassonidou1, Wolfgang Nellen2, Birgit Wetterauer1*

1Zoologisches Institut der Universität München, Luisenstraße 14, 80333 München,
Germany
2University of Kassel, Abt. Genetik, Heinrich-Plett-Str. 40, 34132 Kassel,
Germany
* to whom correspondence should be addressed

Develop. Biol., in press.

cAMP dependent protein kinase (PKA) is an essential regulator of gene
expression and cell differentiation during multicellular development of
Dictyostelium discoideum. Here we show that PKA activity also regulates
gene expression during the growth phase and at the transition from growth
to development. Overexpression of PKA leads to overexpression of the
discoidinIg promoter, while expression of the discoidinIg promoter is
reduced when PKA activity is reduced, either by expression of a dominant
negative mutant of the regulatory subunit, or by disruption of the gene for
the catalytic subunit (PKA-C). The discoidin phenotype of PKA-C null cells
is cell autonomous. In particular, normal secretion of discoidin inducing
factors was demonstrated. In addition, PKA-C null cells are able to respond
to media conditioned by PSF and CMF. We conclude that PKA is a major
activator of discoidin expression. However, it is not required for
production or transduction of the inducing extracellular signals. Therefore
PKA dependent and PKA independent pathways regulate the expression of the
discoidin genes.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
[End Dicty News, volume 14, number 4]

  