dictyNews
Electronic Edition
Volume 39, number 2
January 18, 2013

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu
or by using the form at
http://dictybase.org/db/cgi-bin/dictyBase/abstract_submit.

Back issues of dictyNews, the Dicty Reference database and other
useful information is available at dictyBase - http://dictybase.org.

Follow dictyBase on twitter:
http://twitter.com/dictybase


=========
Abstracts
=========



Asymmetric PTEN Distribution Regulated by Spatial Heterogeneity in 
Membrane-Binding State Transitions

Satomi Matsuoka, Tatsuo Shibata, Masahiro Ueda


PLOS Computational Biology, in press

The molecular mechanisms that underlie asymmetric PTEN distribution 
at the posterior of polarized motile cells and regulate anterior pseudopod 
formation were addressed by novel single-molecule tracking analysis. 
Heterogeneity in the lateral mobility of PTEN on a membrane indicated 
the existence of three membrane-binding states with different diffusion 
coefficients and membrane-binding lifetimes. The stochastic state 
transition kinetics of PTEN among these three states were suggested to 
be regulated spatially along the cell polarity such that only the stable 
binding state is selectively suppressed at the anterior membrane to 
cause local PTEN depletion. By incorporating experimentally observed 
kinetic parameters into a simple mathematical model, the asymmetric 
PTEN distribution can be explained quantitatively to illustrate the 
regulatory mechanisms for cellular asymmetry based on an essential 
causal link between individual stochastic reactions and stable 
localizations of the ensemble.


Submitted by Satomi Matsuoka [matsuoka@phys1.med.osaka-u.ac.jp]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------


Dictyostelium ACAP-A is an ArfGAP involved in cytokinesis, cell 
migration and actin cytoskeleton dynamics

Marco Dias, Cedric Blanc, Nelcy Thazar-Poulot, Sabrina Ben Larbi, 
Pierre Cosson, and Francois Letourneur


Journal of Cell Science, in press

ACAPs and ASAPs are Arf-GTPase-activating proteins with BAR, PH, 
GAP and ankyrin repeat domains and are known to regulate vesicular 
traffic and actin cytoskeleton dynamics in mammalian cells. The amoeba 
Dictyostelium has only two proteins with this domain organization instead 
of six in human, enabling a more precise functional analysis. Genetic 
invalidation of acapA, resulted in multinucleated cells with cytokinesis 
defects. Mutant acapA- cells were hardly motile and their multicellular 
development was significantly delayed. In addition, formation of filopodial 
protrusions was deficient in these cells. Conversely, re-expression of 
ACAP-A-GFP resulted in numerous and long filopodia-like protrusions. 
Mutagenesis studies showed that ACAP-A actin remodeling function was 
dependent on its ability to activate its substrate, the small GTPase ArfA. 
Likewise, the expression of a constitutively active ArfA•GTP mutant in 
wild-type cells led to a significant reduction of filopodia length. Together 
our data support a role for ACAP-A in the control of the actin cytoskeleton 
organization and dynamics through an ArfA-dependent mechanism.


Submitted by Francois Letourneur [francois.letourneur@univ-lyon1.fr]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------


The precision with which single cells of Dictyostelium discoideum can
locate a source of cyclic AMP.

Abha Chopra(1) and Vidyanand Nanjundiah(2) 

(1)Institute for Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Murdoch University, 
Perth, WA 6150, Australia;
(2)Department of Molecular Reproduction and Genetics, Indian Institute of
Science, Bangalore 560012, India)


Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, accepted

When a starved wild-type amoeba of Dictyostelium discoideum is stimulated
by cyclic AMP emanating from a nearby point source, it responds by putting
out a hollow balloon-like membrane extension followed by a pseudopod. The
effect of the stimulus is to influence the position where either of these
protrusions is made on the cell rather than to cause them to be made.
Because the pseudopod forms perpendicular to the cell surface, the site of
formation is a measure of the precision with which a cell can locate the
cAMP source. Cells beyond 1hr of starvation respond non-randomly with a
precision that improves steadily thereafter. A cell that is starved for
1-2hrs can locate the source accurately 43% of the time; the corresponding
figure for a cell starved for 6-7hrs is 87%.  The response always displays
scatter; and population-level heterogeneity reflects stochasticity in the
behaviour of a single cell. From the angular distribution of the response
its maximum information content is estimated to be 2 to 3 bits. In
summary, we quantitatively demonstrate the stochastic nature of the
directional response and the increase in its accuracy over time.


Submitted by Vidyanand Nanjundiah [vidya@ces.iisc.ernet.in]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------


Mass spectrometric analysis of neutral and anionic N-glycans from a 
Dictyostelium discoideum model for human congenital disorder of 
glycosylation CDG IL.

Hykollari A, Balog CI, Rendic; D, Braulke T, Wilson IB, Paschinger K.


J Proteome Res. 2013 Jan 15. [Epub ahead of print]

The HL241 mutant strain of the cellular slime mould Dictyostelium 
discoideum is a potential model for human congenital disorder of 
glycosylation type IL (ALG9-CDG) and has been previously predicted 
to possess a lower degree of modification of its N-glycans with anionic 
moieties than the parental wild-type. In this study, we first showed that 
this strain has a premature stop codon in its alg9 mannosyltransferase 
gene compatible with the occurrence of truncated N-glycans. These 
were subject to an optimised analytical workflow, considering that mass 
spectrometry of acidic glycans often presents challenges due to neutral 
loss and suppression effects. Therefore, the protein-bound N-glycans 
were first fractionated, after serial enzymatic release, by solid phase 
extraction. Then primarily single glycan species were isolated by mixed 
hydrophilic-interaction/anion-exchange or reversed phase HPLC and 
analysed using chemical and enzymatic treatments and MS/MS. We 
show that protein-linked N-glycans of the mutant are of reduced size as 
compared to those of wild-type AX3, but still contain core alpha1,3-fucose, 
intersecting N-acetylglucosamine, bisecting N-acetylglucosamine, 
methylphosphate, phosphate and sulphate residues. We observe that a 
single N-glycan can carry up to four of these six possible modifications. 
Due to the improved analytical procedures, we reveal fuller details 
regarding the N-glycomic potential of this fascinating model organism.


Submitted by Iain Wilson [iain.wilson@boku.ac.at]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------


Dictyostelium development shows a novel pattern of evolutionary 
conservation

Xianjun Tian, Joan E. Strassmann and David C. Queller


Molecular Biology and Evolution, in press

Von Baer’s law states that early stages of animal development are the 
most conserved. More recent evidence supports a modified "hourglass" 
pattern in which an early but somewhat later stage is most conserved.  
Both patterns have been explained by the relative complexity of either 
temporal or spatial interactions; the greatest conservation and lowest 
evolvability occur at the time of the most complex interactions, because 
these cause larger effects that are harder for selection to alter.  This 
general kind of explanation might apply universally across independent 
multicellular systems, as supported by the recent finding of the hourglass 
pattern in plants.  We use RNA-seq expression data from the development 
of the slime mold Dictyostelium to demonstrate that it does not follow either 
of the two canonical patterns but instead tends to show the strongest 
conservation and weakest evolvability late in development. We propose 
that this is consistent with a version of the spatial constraints model, 
modified for organisms that never achieve a high degree of developmental 
modularity.


Submitted by David Queller [queller@biology2.wustl.edu]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------


A non-mitotic CENP-E homolog in Dictyostelium discoideum with slow 
motor activity

Suleyman Kosem (1,3), Zeynep Okten (1,3), Thi-Hieu Ho (1), Gudrun 
Trommler (1), Michael P. Koonce (2), Matthias Samereier (1), 
Annette Mueller-Taubenberger (1)

(1) Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Ludwig Maximilian University of 
Munich, Schillerstr. 42, 80336 Munich, Germany
(2) 2Division of Translational Medicine, Wadsworth Center, Empire State 
Plaza, Albany, New York 12201-0509, USA
(3) Present address: Physics Department E22, Technical University Munich, 
James-Franck-Str. 1, 85748 Garching, Germany


Biochem. Biophys. Res. Comm., in press

Kinesins are ATP-dependent molecular motors that mediate unidirectional 
intracellular transport along microtubules. Dictyostelium discoideum has 13 
different kinesin isoforms including two members of the kinesin-7 family, 
Kif4 and Kif11. While Kif4 is structurally and functionally related to 
centromere-associated CENP-E proteins involved in the transport of 
chromosomes to the poles during mitosis, the function of the unusually 
short CENP-E variant Kif11 is unclear. Here we show that orthologs of short 
CENP-E variants are present in plants and fungi, and analyze functional 
properties of the Dictyostelium CENP-E version, Kif11. Gene knockout 
mutants reveal that Kif11 is not required for mitosis or development. 
Imaging of GFP-labeled Kif11 expressing Dictyostelium cells indicates that 
Kif11 is a plus-end directed motor that accumulates at microtubule plus 
ends. By multiple motor gliding assays, we show that Kif11 moves with an
 average velocity of 38 nm per second, thus defining Kif11 as a very slow 
 motor. The activity of the Kif11 motor appears to be modulated via 
 interactions with the non-catalytic tail region. Our work highlights a 
 subclass of kinesin-7-like motors that function outside of a role in mitosis.


Submitted by [Annette Mueller-Taubenberger [amueller@lrz.uni-muenchen.de]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------


Temporal and non-permanent division of labor during sorocarp formation in 
the social amoeba Acytostelium subglobosum

Kurato Mohri, Yu Kiyota, Hidekazu Kuwayama and Hideko Urushihara*


Developmental Biology, in press

Somatic cell differentiation is crucial for the development of multicellular 
organisms. While the development of a fruiting body in Dictyostelium 
discoideum represents a simple model of this process with separation of 
stalk cells from the spore lineage, that of Acytostelium subglobosum is not 
accompanied by cell type separation. This species produces acellular stalks 
and, seemingly, all aggregated amoebae become spores; however, it 
possesses homologs for the stalk-cell marker genes of D. discoideum. In 
this study, we analyzed the spatio-temporal expression of A. subglobosum 
orthologs for D. discoideum stalk- or spore-lineage markers to clarify the 
developmental process of A. subglobosum. We first found that the prespore 
vesicles, which contained spore coat proteins, started to accumulate in the 
tip region and were observed in the entire sorogen throughout later 
development, confirming that all A. subglobosum cells became spores. The 
expression of a stalk-lineage gene ortholog, As-ecmA, started at the mound 
stage and was prominent in the protruding sorogen. Although two spore-
lineage gene orthologs, As-cotD1 and -cotD2, were likewise detected shortly 
after cell aggregation and increased in intensity until tip formation, their 
expression diminished in the protruding sorogen. Double-fluorescence 
staining of these prestalk and prespore marker genes revealed that the 
expression of these marker genes was mutually exclusive and that 
expression switching occurred in the early tip. Our results indicate that 
A. subglobosum cells become committed to the spore lineage first, and 
then, while keeping this commitment intact, participate in stalk formation. 
Instead of the permanent division of labor observed in D. discoideum, 
A. subglobosum produces fruiting bodies by all cells contributing to the 
formation of the stalk as well as forming spores.


Submitted by Hideko Urushihara [hideko@biol.tsukuba.ac.jp]
==============================================================
[End dictyNews, volume 39, number 2]