dictyNews
Electronic Edition
Volume 39, number 20
July 12, 2013

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu
or by using the form at
http://dictybase.org/db/cgi-bin/dictyBase/abstract_submit.

Back issues of dictyNews, the Dicty Reference database and other
useful information is available at dictyBase - http://dictybase.org.

Follow dictyBase on twitter:
http://twitter.com/dictybase


=========
Abstracts
=========



ForC lacks canonical formin activity but bundles actin filaments and is 
required and multicellular development of Dictyostelium cells

Alexander Junemann (1), Moritz Winterhoff (1), Benjamin Nordholz (1), 
Klemens Rottner (2,3), Ludwig Eichinger (4), Ralph Gräf (5), and Jan Faix (1)

(1) Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Hannover Medical School, 
Carl-Neuberg Straße 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany
(2) Institute of Genetics, University of Bonn, Karlrobert-Kreiten-Strasse 13, 
53115 Bonn, Germany
(3) Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Inhoffenstrasse 7, 38124 
Braunschweig, Germany
(4) Centre for Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, 
Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 52, 50931 Cologne, Germany
(5) Department of Cell Biology, University of Potsdam, 
Karl-Liebknecht-Str. 24-25, 14476 Potsdam-Golm, Germany


EJCB, in press

Diaphanous-related formins (DRFs) drive the nucleation and elongation of 
linear actin filaments downstream of Rho GTPase signaling pathways. 
Dictyostelium formin C (ForC) resembles a DRF, except that it lacks a genuine 
formin homology domain 1 (FH1), raising the questions whether or not ForC 
can nucleate and elongate actin filaments. We found that a recombinant 
ForC-FH2 fragment does not nucleate actin polymerization, but moderately 
decreases the rate of spontaneous actin assembly and disassembly, although 
the barbed-end elongation rate in the presence of the formin was not markedly 
changed. However, the protein bound and crosslinked actin filaments into loose 
bundles of mixed polarity. Furthermore, ForC is an important regulator of 
morphogenesis since ForC-null cells are severely impaired in development 
resulting in the formation of aberrant fruiting bodies. Immunoblotting revealed 
that ForC is absent during growth, but becomes detectable at the onset of early 
aggregation when cells chemotactically stream together to form a multicellular 
organism, and peaks around the culmination stage. Fluorescence microscopy of 
cells ectopically expressing a GFP-tagged, N-terminal ForC fragment showed its 
prominent accumulation in the leading edge, suggesting that ForC may play a 
role in cell migration. In agreement with its expression profile, no defects were 
observed in random migration of vegetative mutant cells. Notably, chemotaxis of 
starved cells towards a source of cAMP was severely impaired as opposed to 
control. This was, however, largely due to a marked developmental delay of the 
mutant, as evidenced by the expression profile of the early developmental marker 
csA. In line with this, chemotaxis was almost restored to wild type levels after 
prolonged starvation. Finally, we observed a complete failure of phototaxis due 
to abolished slug formation and a massive reduction of spores consistent with 
forC promoter-driven expression of ß-galactosidase in presporecells. Together, 
these findings demonstrate ForC to be critically involved in regulation of the 
cytoskeleton during various stages of development.


Submitted by Jan Faix [faix.jan@mh-hannover.de]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------


Mitochondria are the target organelle of differentiation-inducing factor-3, 
an anti-tumor agent isolated from Dictyostelium discoideum

Yuzuru Kubohara 1*, Haruhisa Kikuchi 2, Yusuke Matsuo 2, 
Yoshiteru Oshima 2 and Yoshimi Homma 3

1 Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Institute for Molecular and 
Cellular Regulation, Gunma University, Maebashi 371-8512, Japan
2 Laboratory of Natural Product Chemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School 
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Aoba-yama, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8578, Japan
3 Department of Biomolecular Science, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, 
Fukushima Medical University School of Medicine, Fukushima 960-1295, Japan


PLoS ONE, in press.

Differentiation-inducing factor-3 (DIF-3), found in the cellular slime mold 
Dictyostelium discoideum, and its derivatives such as butoxy-DIF-3 
(Bu-DIF-3) are potent anti-tumor agents. However, the precise mechanisms 
underlying the actions of DIF-3 remain to be elucidated. In this study, we 
synthesized a green fluorescent derivative of DIF-3, BODIPY-DIF-3, and a 
control fluorescent compound, Bu-BODIPY (butyl-BODIPY), and investigated 
how DIF-like molecules behave in human cervical cancer HeLa cells by using 
both fluorescence and electron microscopy. BODIPY-DIF-3 at 5–20 microM 
suppressed cell growth in a dose-dependent manner, whereas Bu-BODIPY 
had minimal effect on cell growth. When cells were incubated with BODIPY-
DIF-3 at 20 microM, it penetrated cell membranes within 0.5 h and localized 
mainly in mitochondria, while Bu-BODIPY did not stain the cells. Exposure of 
cells for 1–3 days to DIF-3, Bu-DIF-3, BODIPY-DIF-3, or CCCP (a mitochondrial 
uncoupler) induced substantial mitochondrial swelling, suppressing cell growth. 
When added to isolated mitochondria, DIF-3, Bu-DIF-3, and BOIDPY-DIF-3, like 
CCCP, dose-dependently promoted the rate of oxygen consumption, but 
Bu-BODIPY did not. Our results suggest that these bioactive DIF-like molecules 
suppress cell growth, at least in part, by disturbing mitochondrial activity. This is 
the first report showing the cellular localization and behavior of DIF-like 
molecules in mammalian tumor cells.


Submitted by Yuzuru Kubohara [kubohara@showa.gunma-u.ac.jp]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------


Target recognition, RNA methylation activity and transcriptional regulation 
of the Dictyostelium discoideum Dnmt2-homologue (DnmA) 

Sara Mueller1,2, Indra M. Windhof1, Vladimir Maximov1,3, Tomasz Jurkowski4, 
Albert Jeltsch4, Konrad U. Förstner5, Cynthia M. Sharma5, Ralph Graef6, 
Wolfgang Nellen1*

1 Department of Genetics, University of Kassel, Heinrich-Plett-Str. 40, 
34132 Kassel, Germany
2 current address: Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, 
Georg-August-University, Humboldtallee 23, 37073 Göttingen, Germany
3 current address: Department of Plant Biology and Forest Genetics, 
Uppsala BioCenter, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, 
PO-Box 7080, SE-75007 Uppsala, Sweden
4 Institute of Biochemistry, University Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 55, 
70569 Stuttgart, Germany
5 Research Center for Infectious Diseases (ZINF), University of Wuerzburg, 
Josef-Schneider-Str. 2/Bau D15, 97080 Wuerzburg
6  Universitaet Potsdam, Institut für Biochemie und Biologie, Abt. Zellbiologie, 
Karl-Liebknecht-Strasse 24-25,, 14476 Potsdam - Golm


Nucleic Acids Research, in press 

Although the DNA methyltransferase 2 family is highly conserved during 
evolution and recent reports suggested a dual specificity with stronger activity 
on tRNA than DNA substrates, the biological function is still obscure. We show 
that the Dictyostelium discoideum Dnmt2-homologue DnmA is an active tRNA 
methyltransferase that modifies C38 in tRNAAsp(GUC) in vitro and in vivo. By 
a UV-crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP) approach we identified 
further DnmA targets. This revealed specific tRNA fragments bound by the 
enzyme and identified tRNAGlu(CUC/UUC) and tRNAGly(GCC) as new but 
weaker substrates for both human Dnmt2 and DnmA in vitro but apparently 
not in vivo. Dnmt2 enzymes form transient covalent complexes with their 
substrates. The dynamics of complex formation and complex resolution reflect 
methylation efficiency in vitro. Quantitative PCR analyses revealed alterations 
in dnmA expression during development, cell cycle and in response to 
temperature stress. However, dnmA expression only partially correlated with 
tRNA methylation in vivo. Strikingly, dnmA expression in the laboratory strain 
AX2 was significantly lower than in the NC4 parent strain. Since expression 
levels and binding of DnmA to a target in vivo are apparently not necessarily 
accompanied by methylation, we propose an additional biological function of 
DnmA apart from methylation.


Submitted by Wolfgang Nellen [nellen@uni-kassel.de]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------


Chromatin organisation of transgenes in Dictyostelium

Indra Windhof*, Manu J. Dubin*1 and Wolfgang Nellen2

Abt. Genetik, FB 10, Universität Kassel, Heinrich-Plett-Str. 40, 34132 Kassel, 
Germany

* these authors equally contributed to this paper
1 present address: Gregor Mendel Institute of Molecular Plant Biology, 
Doktor-Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria
2 corresponding author


Die Pharmazie 7/2013, page 595-600.

The introduction of transgenes in Dictyostelium discoideum typically results in 
the integration of the transformation vector into the genome at one or a few 
insertion sites as tandem arrays of approx. 100 copies. Exceptions are 
extrachromosomal vectors, which do not integrate into chromosomes, and 
vectors containing resistance markers such as Blasticidin, which integrate as 
single copies at one or a few sites. 

Here we report that low copy number vector inserts display typical euchromatic 
features while high copy number insertions are enriched for modifications 
associate with heterochromatin. Interestingly, high copy number insertions also 
colocalise with heterochromatin, are enriched for the centromeric histone CenH3 
and display centromere-like behaviour during mitosis. We also found that the 
chromatin organisation on extrachromosmal transgenes is different from those 
integrated into the chromosomes.


Submitted by Wolfgang Nellen [nellen@uni-kassel.de]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------


WASH is required for lysosomal recycling and efficient autophagic and 
phagocytic digestion

Jason S. King1, Aurélie Gueho2, Monica Hagedorn3, Navin Gopaldass,2 
Florence Leuba2, Thierry Soldati2 and Robert H. Insall1.

1 Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, Garscube Estate, Bearsden, 
Glasgow, UK. G61 1BD
2 Department of Biochemistry, University of Geneva, 30 quai Ernest 
Ansermet, Sciences II, CH-1211-Genève-4, Switzerland.
3 Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, Bernhard-Nocht Strasse 74, 
20359 Hamburg, Germany.


Molecular Biology of the Cell, In press

WASH is an important regulator of vesicle trafficking. By generating actin on the 
surface of intracellular vesicles, WASH is able to directly regulate endosomal 
sorting and maturation. Here we report that in Dictyostelium, WASH is also 
required for the lysosomal digestion of both phagocytic and autophagic cargo. 
Consequently, Dictyostelium cells lacking WASH are unable to grow on many 
bacteria, or digest their own cytoplasm to survive starvation. WASH is required 
for efficient phagosomal proteolysis, and proteomic analysis demonstrates that 
this is due to reduced delivery of lysosomal hydrolases. Both protease and lipase 
delivery are disrupted, and lipid catabolism is also perturbed. Starvation-induced 
autophagy therefore leads to phospholipid accumulation within WASH null 
lysosomes. This causes the formation of multilamellar bodies typical of many 
lysosomal storage diseases. Mechanistically, we show that in cells lacking WASH, 
cathepsin D becomes trapped in a late endosomal compartment, unable to be 
recycled to nascent phagosomes and autophagosomes. WASH is therefore 
required for the maturation of lysosomes to a stage where hydrolases can be
 retrieved and reused. 


Submitted by Jason King [j.king@beatson.gla.ac.uk]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 
 Aeromonas salmonicida Ati2 is an effector protein of the type three secretion 
 system.

Dallaire-Dufresne S, Barbeau X, Sarty D, Tanaka KH, Denoncourt AM, Lagüe P, 
Reith ME, Charette SJ.


Microbiology. 2013 Jul 7. [Epub ahead of print]

The bacterium Aeromonas salmonicida, a fish pathogen, uses the type three 
secretion system (TTSS) to inject effector proteins into host cells to promote the 
infection. The study of the genome of A. salmonicida has revealed the existence 
of Ati2, a potential TTSS effector protein. In the present study, a structure-function 
analysis of Ati2 has been done to determine its role in the virulence of 
A. salmonicida. Biochemical assays revealed that Ati2 is secreted into the medium 
in a TTSS-dependent manner. Protein sequence analyses, molecular modeling 
and biochemical assays demonstrated that Ati2 is an inositol polyphosphate 
5-phosphatase which hydrolyzes PtdIns(4,5)P2 and PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 in a way 
similar to VPA0450, a protein from Vibrio parahaemolyticus having high sequence 
similarity with Ati2. Mutants of Ati2 with altered amino acids at two different 
locations in the catalytic site displayed no phosphatase activity. Wild-type and 
mutant forms of Ati2 were cloned into expression systems for Dictyostelium 
discoideum, a soil amoeba used as alternative host to study A. salmonicida 
virulence. Expression tests allowed us to demonstrate that Ati2 is toxic for the 
host cell in a catalytic-dependent manner. Finally, this study has demonstrated 
the existence of a new TTSS effector protein in A. salmonicida.


Submitted by Steve Charette [steve.charette@bcm.ulaval.ca]
==============================================================
[End dictyNews, volume 39, number 20]