dictyNews
Electronic Edition
Volume 39, number 16
May 31, 2013

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu
or by using the form at
http://dictybase.org/db/cgi-bin/dictyBase/abstract_submit.

Back issues of dictyNews, the Dicty Reference database and other
useful information is available at dictyBase - http://dictybase.org.

Follow dictyBase on twitter:
http://twitter.com/dictybase


=========
Abstracts
=========



Aberrant spindle dynamics and cytokinesis in Dictyostelium 
discoideum cells that lack glycogen synthase kinase 3

Adrian J. Harwood, Josephine E. Forde-Thomas, Hazel Williams, 
Matthias Samereier and Annette Mueller-Taubenberger


European Journal of Cell Biology, in press

Eukaryotic cell division requires the co-ordinated assembly and 
disassembly of the mitotic spindle, accurate chromosome 
segregation and temporal control of cytokinesis to generate two 
daughter cells. While the absolute details of these processes 
differ between organisms, there are evolutionarily conserved core 
components common to all eukaryotic cells, whose identification 
will reveal the key processes that control cell division. Glycogen 
synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3) is a major protein kinase found 
throughout the eukaryotes and regulates many processes, 
including cell differentiation, growth, motility and apoptosis. In 
animals, GSK-3 associates with mitotic spindles and its inhibition 
causes mis-regulation of chromosome segregation. Two 
suppressor screens in yeast point to a more general effect of 
GSK-3 on cell division, however the direct role of GSK-3 in 
control of mitosis has not been explored outside the animal 
kingdom. Here we report that the Dictyostelium discoideum 
GSK-3 orthologue, GskA, associates with the mitotic spindle 
during cell division, as seen for its mammalian counterparts. 
Dictyostelium possesses only a single GSK-3 gene that can be 
deleted to eliminate all GSK-3 activity. We found that gskA-null 
mutants failed to elongate their mitotic spindle and were unable 
to divide in shaking culture, but have no chromosome segregation 
defect. These results suggest further conservation for the role of 
GSK-3 in the regulation of spindle dynamics during mitosis, but 
also reveal differences in the mechanisms ensuring accurate 
chromosome segregation.


Submitted by Adrian Harwood [harwoodaj@cf.ac.uk]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------


The use of streptavidin conjugates as immunoblot loading controls 
& mitochondrial markers for use with Dictyostelium discoideum

Andrew J. Davidson*, Jason S. King*1 and Robert H. Insall

Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, Garscube Estate, Bearsden, 
Glasgow, UK. G61 1BD
*These authors contributed equally to this work
1Corresponding author


BioTechniques, in press

The loading controls used from quantitative immunoblotting in 
mammalian cells are not appropriate for use with Dictyostelium 
discoideum. Actin, for example changes greatly during development, 
and other antibodies are not commercially available. Here we 
demonstrate the use of labeled streptavidin to detect the biotinylated, 
mitochondrial MCCC1, providing a robust and convenient tool for the 
quantitative normalization of Dictyostelium western blots as well as 
labeling mitochondria in fixed cells.


Submitted by Jason King [j.king@beatson.gla.ac.uk]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------


Dictyostelids:
Evolution, genomics and cell biology

Editors: Maria Romeralo, Sandra Baldauf, Ricardo Escalante
Soon available at:
http://www.springer.com/life+sciences/evolutionary+%26+developmental+biology/book/978-3-642-38486-8

Chapter 1. Dictyostelium discoideum as a model in biomedical research
Sandra Munoz-Braceras, Ana Mesquita and Ricardo Escalante

The simple eukaryote Dictyostelium discoideum has been traditionally 
used to understand basic principles of cell and developmental biology 
and now has also become a useful system in biomedical research. 
What are the similarities and differences between D. discoideum and 
other simple microbial models such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae? 
Which aspects are more advantageous to address in D. discoideum? 
Are there any processes or specific proteins present in D. discoideum 
that are difficult or impossible to study in other systems? Does it make 
sense to use such a simple organism in biomedicine? These and other 
questions will be addressed in this chapter, together with some specific 
examples in which D. discoideum has proved its potential to model 
human disease. 


Chapter 2. Genome analysis of social amoebae
Gernot Gloeckner

Genomics is now an indispensible part of the biological sciences. 
Today a species description without genome information is incomplete. 
This chapter describes the current knowledge on the genome of the 
model species D. discoideum. A comparison with other social amoebae 
genomes covering the whole breadth of this branch of evolution carves 
out driving forces of speciation and the common toolkit of all social 
amoebae. The vast evolutionary distance within this branch makes 
ortholog detection difficult. While the coding capacity of all social 
amoebae is largely conserved, species specific gene family expansions 
of proteins for environmental sensing, signaling, and secondary 
metabolites provide for diversification. The sequences of the functional 
chromosomal elements (telomeres and centromeres) are not conserved, 
rather they seem to have underwent severe modifications. Nucleosome 
patterns link the social amoebae to other, more sophisti-cated 
multicellular systems. Comparative curated databases make this wealth 
of genome information accessible and play an important role for the 
dissemination of the knowledge on this evolutionary branch. 


Chapter 3. Signalling during Dictyostelium development
Cornelis J Weijer 

Dictyostelium has become an important model system to study the 
molecular details of the signalling pathways controlling gradient 
sensing and cell polarisation that control localised activation of the 
actin myosin cytoskeleton responsible for evolutionary highly 
conserved mechanisms of chemotactic cell movement up chemo-
attractant gradients. 3'-5' cyclic AMP is the chemo-attractant that 
controls the chemotactic cell movements that result in aggregation 
of up to several hundred thousand cells, slug formation, migration 
and fruiting body formation. The coordination of these complex cell 
movements require long range cAMP mediated cell-cell signalling 
based on periodic initiation of cAMP signals in the aggregation 
centre and slug tip and relay by surrounding cells, resulting in 
highly dynamic patterns of cAMP wave propagation. Model 
calculations have shown that the dynamic feedbacks between 
autocatalytic cell-cell cAMP signalling and cAMP mediated 
collective chemotactic cell movement result in emergent properties 
that readily explain multi cellular morphogenesis. cAMP signalling 
not only controls cell movement but also acts as a key morphogen 
to control cell differentiation, which in turn affects celltype specific 
cell-cell signalling and cell movement, adding an additional layer 
of feedback. To fully understand the multicellular morphogenesis 
of this organism at the level of cell behaviours it will be needed to 
integrate the detailed celltype proportioning mechanisms in models 
describing cell-cell signalling and movement. Dictyostelium is likely 
to be the first eukaryotic organism where it will be possible to 
quantitatively understand how multicellular development and 
morphogenesis arise as emergent properties from a few relatively 
simple collective cell behaviours.


Chapter 4. The chemotactic compass
Dawit Jowhar and Chris Janetopoulos

Cells have an amazing ability to sense very shallow gradients of 
chemoattractants and move directionally.  This fundamental 
process is critical for development and numerous disease states. 
Dictyostelium has emerged as one of the best understood model 
systems for elucidating the complex signaling pathways that drive 
chemotaxis. This review focuses on the signaling mechanisms 
regulating directed migration and discusses the role of polarity 
and development on our current understanding of this process.  
We highlight new findings using a second chemoattractant, folic 
acid and suggest that this chemical cue should be used when a 
developmental defect is suspected. We also speculate on recent 
studies, which suggest that researchers should use our new 
understanding of the temporal and spatial relationships of signaling 
and cytoskeletal proteins to guide future experiments.


Chapter 5. Transcriptional Regulators - Dynamic Drivers of 
Multicellular Formation, Cell Differentiation and Development
Rafael Rosengarten, Balaji Santhanam, and Mariko Katoh-Kurasawa 

In this chapter we examine what is known about the roles of individual 
transcription regulators in mediating development in Dictyostelium 
discoideum. We present a broad review of the field, covering genetic, 
biochemical, molecular and bioinformatic experiments that illuminate 
transcriptional regulation in the context of developmental events. We 
highlight evidence for evolutionary conservation where it exists, and 
have sought to underscore the power of RNA sequencing as a tool 
for comparative studies and global analysis. We believe that as next 
generation 'omics approaches are more widely applied, we may paint 
a more complete picture of the gene regulatory networks governing 
dictyostelid development, and gain insight into general evolutionary 
processes that shape developmental biology.


Chapter 6. Non-coding RNAs in Dictyostelium discoideum and other 
dictyostelid social amoebae
Lotta Avesson, Andrea Hinas, and Fredrik Soederbom

Non-coding (nc)RNAs have recently emerged as ubiquitous and 
important regulators of a multitude of different processes, such as 
stress response, cell differentiation, infection, and cell death. The 
means by which ncRNAs affect these processes are numerous and 
diverse, ranging from protein localization to regulation of gene 
expression. ncRNA-mediated gene expression control has been the 
subject of especially intense study in recent years and shown to occur 
through several mechanisms. Different ncRNAs can regulate gene 
expression transcriptionally by inducing modification of DNA or 
chromatin, or post-transcriptionally by directing cleavage, degradation, 
or translational inhibition of messenger (m)RNAs. ncRNAs come in a 
broad spectrum of sizes, from ~20 nucleotides (nt) to several thousand 
nt, and function in complexes with various proteins that usually exert a 
catalytic function while the RNAs act as guides. In Dictyostelia, we 
have only started to understand the extent of ncRNA regulation, 
mostly from studies in Dictyostelium discoideum, which is the focus 
of this chapter.

Chapter 7. Sex in Dictyostelia
Gareth Bloomfield
Dictyostelid social amoebae possess both sexual and parasexual 
cycles. In the former, diploid zygotes attract surrounding haploids 
and then cannibalise them, forming large immobile structures known 
as macrocysts. In the parasexual cycle, amoebae of the same sex 
fuse to form diploids that can continue to grow and multiply. Species 
with more than two sexes (or mating types) are not unusual among 
dictyostelia, and recently the genetic basis for sex determination was 
described in the model species Dictyostelium discodeum. Macrocysts 
have so far only been observed in a minority of the known species, 
and their ecological context and significance is still not understood. 
Important questions regarding altruism, genetics, and the basic cell 
biology of both the sexual and parasexual cycles remain to be 
addressed experimentally, so there remains tremendous scope for 
future research. 


Chapter 8. A global overview of Dictyostelid Ecology with special 
emphasis in North American forest
James C. Cavender

Development in 1965 of a quantitative method for dictyostelid 
isolation from soil samples, made possible ecological studies based 
on frequency and density of occurrence. Information has subsequently 
been obtained on a number of aspects of dictyostelid ecology. I 
discuss some of them along this chapter, especially those aspects 
studied after Raper's publication in 1984 of his famous book 
'The Dictyostelids'. These include dispersal, relative abundance, 
optimum conditions for maximum diversity, comparison of temperate 
and tropical populations, ecological individuality of species (especially 
Dictyostelium discoideum), possible decline in species numbers and 
global distribution of Dictyostelia.


Chapter 9. Evolution of Dictyostelid Social Amoebas inferred from 
the use of molecular tools
Maria Romeralo and Omar Fiz.

Dictyostelid social amoebas are eukaryotic microbes distributed 
all around the globe. As with many other protist groups, one 
fundamental and revolutionary event in the study of dictyostelid 
(Amoebozoa) systematics has been the use of molecular tools. 
This has radically changed our understanding of evolution across 
the group and has greatly expanded the potential use of dictyostelids 
as model organisms for a wide range of areas including biomedicine, 
development, evolutionary biology and molecular ecology. This is 
further supported by genome sequencing that has been carried out 
for at least one species in each of the major groups. Phylogenomic 
data is also essential to pinpointing the origin of diversification of 
dictyostelids in terrestrial ecosystems, which is basic for 
understanding the evolutionary history across eukaryotic amoeboid 
lineages.


Chapter 10. The Evolution of the Cellular Slime Molds
John Tyler Bonner

The cellular slime molds have existed for a very long time; they 
have an ancient history.  It is surprising that the early morphological 
species have not been supplanted and gone extinct, as is the case 
for larger organisms; a sizable number of ancient cellular slime 
molds still exist today - they are living fossils.  This unusual 
phenomenon can be explained if one assumes that their morphology 
is only weakly affected by natural selection leading to a modest 
variation of morphology among the different species.  I argue that 
the reason for their apparent relative immunity to the effects of natural 
selection can be explained by their small size; this is a general rule 
among all microorganisms.


Chapter 11. Social selection in the cellular slime moulds
Vidyanand Nanjundiah and Santosh Sathe

Starvation triggers a complex series of intercellular interactions in 
the cellular slime mould amoebae. As a result the amoebae aggregate, 
form a coherent multicellular structure with division of labour and, 
eventually, differentiate into a fruiting body made up of a stalk and a 
spore mass. Whether an amoeba dies and forms part of the stalk or 
becomes a stress-resistant spore depends both on pre-existing biases 
and on post-starvation signalling between amoebae. Mutual 
communication permits one amoeba to influence the phenotype, and 
therefore affect the fitness, of another. The implication is that social 
selection has been a major factor in the evolution of cooperative
 behaviour in these amoebae.
 

Chapter 12. The non-dictyostelid sorocarpic amoebae
Matthew W. Brown, Jeffrey D. Silberman

The social life cycle made famous through research on the 
dictyostelids is not an evolutionary innovation that is solely unique 
to the dictyostelids. Since 1873 other protistans with a similar life 
styles have been recognized. Historically, they have been allied 
under various taxonomic classifications over the last 140 years; 
however, the recent influx of molecular data has proven that 
analogous methods through a social means to form a spore 
dispersal structure have independently arose in seven different 
lineages of eukaryotic organisms. Here we provide a brief 
introduction to each of the amoeboid organisms that display this 
behavior focusing on their life histories and the history of the 
research on each taxon. These organisms represent one of the 
most striking examples of ultimate convergent evolution across 
the greatest possible evolutionary distances in eukaryotic 
evolution. Research into the molecular and developmental 
biology that underlies the evolution of a social life cycle and 
formation of a fruiting body is still in its infancy when compared 
to the dictyostelids. However, the genomes from several non-
dictyostelid sorocarpic amoebae are soon becoming available, 
and a new age of research into these fascinating organisms is 
beginning to gain traction. 

 
Submitted by Ricardo Escalante [rescalante@iib.uam.es]
==============================================================
[End dictyNews, volume 39, number 16]