dictyNews
Electronic Edition
Volume 30, number 13
April 25, 2008

Please submit abstracts of your papers as soon as they have been
accepted for publication by sending them to dicty@northwestern.edu
or by using the form at
http://dictybase.org/db/cgi-bin/dictyBase/abstract_submit.

Back issues of dictyNews, the Dicty Reference database and other
useful information is available at dictyBase - http://dictybase.org.


=========
Abstracts
=========


Molecular and functional characterization of a Rho GDP dissociation i
nhibitor in the filamentous fungus Tuber borchii 

Michele Menotta(1), Antonella Amicucci(1), Giorgio Basili(1), 
Emanuela Polidori(2), Vilberto Stocchi(1), Francisco Rivero(3)

1Istituto di Chimica Biologica “G. Fornaini”, Università degli Studi di 
Urbino, Urbino (PU) Italy. 
2Istituto di Ricerca sull’Attività Motoria, Università degli Studi di 
Urbino, Urbino (PU) Italy. 
3Center for Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, 
Cologne, Germany, 
and The Hull York Medical School and Department of Biological Sciences, 
University of Hull. Hull, United Kingdom.


BMC Microbiology, in press

Background. Small GTPases of the Rho family function as tightly regulated 
molecular switches that govern important cellular functions in eukaryotes. 
Several families of regulatory proteins control their activation cycle and 
subcellular localization. Members of the guanine nucleotide dissociation 
inhibitor (GDI) family sequester Rho GTPases from the plasma membrane and 
keep them in an inactive form. 

Results. We report on the characterization the RhoGDI homolog of Tuber 
borchii Vittad., an ascomycetous ectomycorrhizal fungus. The Tbgdi gene is 
present in two copies in the T. borchii genome. The predicted amino acid 
sequence shows high similarity to other known RhoGDIs. Real time PCR analyses 
revealed an increased expression of Tbgdi during the phase preparative to the 
symbiosis instauration, in particular after stimulation with root exudates 
extracts, that correlates with expression of Tbcdc42. In a translocation
assay TbRhoGDI was able to solubilize TbCdc42 from membranes. Surprisingly, 
TbRhoGDI appeared not to interact with S. cerevisiae Cdc42, precluding the 
use of yeast as a surrogate model for functional studies. To study the role 
of TbRhoGDI we performed complementation experiments using a RhoGDI null 
strain of Dictyostelium discoideum, a model organism where the roles of Rho 
signaling pathways are well established. For comparison, complementation 
with mammalian RhoGDI1 and LyGDI was also studied in the null strain. 
Although interacting with Rac1 isoforms, TbRhoGDI was not able to revert the 
defects of the D. discoideum RhoGDI null strain, but displayed an additional 
negative effect on the cAMP-stimulated actin polymerization response. 

Conclusions. T. borchii expresses a functional RhoGDI homolog that appears 
as an important modulator of cytoskeleton reorganization during polarized 
apical growth that antecedes symbiosis instauration. The specificity of 
TbRhoGDI actions was underscored by its inability to elicit a growth defect 
in S. cerevisiae or to compensate the loss of a D. discoideum RhoGDI. 
Knowledge of the cell signaling at the basis of cytoskeleton reorganization 
of ectomycorrhizal fungi is essential for improvements in the production of 
mycorrhized plant seedlings used in timberland extension programs and fruit 
body production.


Submitted by: Francisco Rivero  [francisco.rivero@uni-koeln.de]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Widespread duplications in the genomes of laboratory stocks of 
Dictyostelium discoideum

Gareth Bloomfield, Yoshimasa Tanaka, Jason Skelton, 
Alasdair Ivens & Robert R. Kay

MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 OQH, UK
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, 
Cambridge, CB10 1SA, UK


Accepted, Genome Biology.

Background: Duplications of stretches of the genome are an important 
source of individual genetic variation, but their unrecognized presence 
in laboratory organisms would be a confounding variable for genetic 
analysis.

Results: We report here that duplications of 15 kb or more are common in 
the genome of the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum.  Most stocks of 
the axenic ‘workhorse’ strains Ax2 and Ax3/4 obtained from different 
laboratories can be expected to carry different duplications.  The 
auxotrophic strains DH1 and JH10 also bear previously unreported 
duplications.  Strain Ax3/4 is known to carry a large duplication on
chromosome 2 and this structure shows evidence of continuing instability;
we find a further variable duplication on chromosome 5.  These 
duplications are lacking in Ax2, which has instead a small duplication 
on chromosome 1.  Stocks of the type isolate NC4 are similarly variable,
though we have identified some approximating the assumed ancestral 
genotype.  More recent wild-type isolates are almost without duplications,
but we can identify small deletions or regions of high divergence, possibly 
reflecting responses to local selective pressures.  Duplications are 
scattered through most of the genome, and can be stable enough to reconstruct 
genealogies spanning decades of the history of the NC4 lineage.  The 
expression level of many duplicated genes is increased with dosage, but for 
others it appears that some form of dosage compensation occurs.

Conclusions: The genetic variation described here must underlie some of the 
phenotypic variation observed between strains from different laboratories. 
We suggest courses of action to alleviate the problem.


Submitted by: Gareth Bloomfield [garethb@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Changing directions in the study of chemotaxis 

Robert R. Kay, Paul Langridge1, David Traynor and Oliver Hoeller


Nature Reviews of Molecular Cell Biology, in press

Chemotaxis — guided movement of cells in chemical gradients — probably first 
emerged in our single-celled ancestors and is recognisably similar in 
neutrophils and amoebae today.  Chemotaxis enables immune cells to reach 
sites of infection, allows wounds to heal and is crucial for forming embryonic 
patterns; its manipulation may help alleviate disease states, including the 
metastasis of cancer cells.  We discuss recent results concerning how cells 
orientate in chemotactic gradients and the role of PIP3, what produces the 
force for projecting pseudopodia, and a new role for the endocytic cycle 
in movement.


Submitted by: Rob Kay [rrk@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Persistent Cell Motion in the Absence of External Signals: A Search Strategy 
for Eukaryotic Cells

Liang Li(1), Simon F. Nørrelykke(2), and Edward C. Cox(2)

1 Department of Physics, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, USA
2 Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, 
New Jersey, USA


PLoS One, in press

Background
Eukaryotic cells are large enough to detect signals and then orient to them 
by differentiating the signal strength across the length and breadth of the 
cell. Amoebae, fibroblasts, neutrophils and growth cones all behave in this 
way. Little is known however about cell motion and searching behavior in the 
absence of a signal. Is individual cell motion best characterized as a random 
walk? Do individual cells have a search strategy when they are beyond the 
range of the signal they would otherwise move toward? Here we ask if single, 
isolated, Dictyostelium and Polysphondylium amoebae bias their motion in the 
absence of external cues.

Methodology
We placed single well-isolated Dictyostelium and Polysphondylium cells on a 
nutrient-free agar surface and followed them at 10 sec intervals for ~10 hr, 
then analyzed their motion with respect to velocity, turning angle, 
persistence length, and persistence time, comparing the results to the 
expectation for a variety of different types of random motion.

Conclusions
We find that amoeboid behavior is well described by a special kind of random 
motion: Amoebae show a long persistence time (~10 min) beyond which they 
start to lose their direction; they move forward in a zig-zag manner; and 
they make turns every 1-2 min on average. They bias their motion by 
remembering the last turn and turning away from it. Interpreting the motion 
as consisting of runs and turns, the duration of a run and the amplitude of 
a turn are both found to be exponentially distributed.  We show that this 
behavior greatly improves their chances of finding a target relative to 
performing a random walk. We believe that other eukaryotic cells may 
employ a strategy similar to Dictyostelium when seeking conditions or 
signal sources not yet within range of their detection system.


Submitted by: Liang Li [liangl@princeton.edu]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Disruption of Four Kinesin Genes in Dictyostelium.

D.K. Nag, I. Tikhonenko, I. Soga, and M.P. Koonce


Accepted, BMC Cell Biology 2008, 9:21.

Background
Kinesin and dynein are the two families of microtubule-based motors that 
drive much of the intracellular movements in eukaryotic cells. Using a gene 
knockout strategy, we address here the individual function(s) of four of the 
13 kinesin proteins in Dictyostelium. The goal of our ongoing project is to 
establish a minimal motility proteome for this basal eukaryote, enabling us 
to contrast motor functions here with the often far more elaborate motor 
families in the metazoans.

Results
We performed individual disruptions of the kinesin genes, kif4, kif8, kif10, 
and kif11. None of the motors encoded by these genes are essential for 
development or viability of Dictyostelium. Removal of Kif4 (kinesin-7; 
CENP-E family) significantly impairs the rate of cell growth and, when 
combined with a previously characterized dynein inhibition, results in 
dramatic defects in mitotic spindle assembly. Kif8 (kinesin-4; chromokinesin 
family) and Kif10 (kinesin-8; Kip3 family) appear to cooperate with dynein 
to organize the interphase radial microtubule array.

Conclusions
The results reported here extend the number of kinesin gene disruptions 
in Dictyostelium, to now total 10, among the 13 isoforms. None of these 
motors, individually, are required for short-term viability. In contrast, 
homologs of at least six of the 10 kinesins are considered essential in 
humans. Our work underscores the functional redundancy of motor isoforms 
in basal organisms while highlighting motor specificity in more complex 
metazoans. Since motor disruption in Dictyostelium can readily be 
combined with other motility insults and stresses, this organism offers 
an excellent system to investigate functional interactions among the 
kinesin motor family.


Submitted by: Michael Koonce [koonce@wadsworth.org]
==============================================================
[End dictyNews, volume 30, number 13]